May of 1864 came--a hot dry May that wilted the flowers in the
buds--and the Yankees under General Sherman were in Georgia again,
above Dalton, one hundred miles northwest of Atlanta.  Rumor had it
that there would be heavy fighting up there near the boundary
between Georgia and Tennessee.  The Yankees were massing for an
attack on the Western and Atlantic Railroad, the line which
connected Atlanta with Tennessee and the West, the same line over
which the Southern troops had been rushed last fall to win the
victory at Chickamauga.

But, for the most part, Atlanta was not disturbed by the prospect
of fighting near Dalton.  The place where the Yankees were
concentrating was only a few miles southeast of the battle field of
Chickamauga.  They had been driven back once when they had tried to
break through the mountain passes of that region, and they would be
driven back again.

Atlanta--and all of Georgia--knew that the state was far too
important to the Confederacy for General Joe Johnston to let the
Yankees remain inside the state's borders for long.  Old Joe and
his army would not let even one Yankee get south of Dalton, for too
much depended on the undisturbed functioning of Georgia.  The
unravaged state was a vast granary, machine shop and storehouse for
the Confederacy.  It manufactured much of the powder and arms used
by the army and most of the cotton and woolen goods.  Lying between
Atlanta and Dalton was the city of Rome with its cannon foundry and
its other industries, and Etowah and Allatoona with the largest
ironworks south of Richmond.  And, in Atlanta, were not only the
factories for making pistols and saddles, tents and ammunition, but
also the most extensive rolling mills in the South, the shops of
the principal railroads and the enormous hospitals.  And in Atlanta
was the junction of the four railroads on which the very life of
the Confederacy depended.

So no one worried particularly.  After all, Dalton was a long way
off, up near the Tennessee line.  There had been fighting in
Tennessee for three years and people were accustomed to the thought
of that state as a far-away battle field, almost as far away as
Virginia or the Mississippi River.  Moreover, Old Joe and his men
were between the Yankees and Atlanta, and everyone knew that, next
to General Lee himself, there was no greater general than Johnston,
now that Stonewall Jackson was dead.

Dr. Meade summed up the civilian point of view on the matter, one
warm May evening on the veranda of Aunt Pitty's house, when he said
that Atlanta had nothing to fear, for General Johnston was standing
in the mountains like an iron rampart.  His audience heard him with
varying emotions, for all who sat there rocking quietly in the
fading twilight, watching the first fireflies of the season moving
magically through the dusk, had weighty matters on their minds.
Mrs. Meade, her hand upon Phil's arm, was hoping the doctor was
right.  If the war came closer, she knew that Phil would have to
go.  He was sixteen now and in the Home Guard.  Fanny Elsing, pale
and hollow eyed since Gettysburg, was trying to keep her mind from
the torturing picture which had worn a groove in her tired mind
these past several months--Lieutenant Dallas McLure dying in a
jolting ox cart in the rain on the long, terrible retreat into
Maryland.

Captain Carey Ashburn's useless arm was hurting him again and
moreover he was depressed by the thought that his courtship of
Scarlett was at a standstill.  That had been the situation ever
since the news of Ashley Wilkes' capture, though the connection
between the two events did not occur to him.  Scarlett and Melanie
both were thinking of Ashley, as they always did when urgent tasks
or the necessity of carrying on a conversation did not divert them.
Scarlett was thinking bitterly, sorrowfully:  He must be dead or
else we would have heard.  Melanie, stemming the tide of fear again
and again, through endless hours, was telling herself:  "He can't
be dead.  I'd know it--I'd feel it if he were dead."  Rhett Butler
lounged in the shadows, his long legs in their elegant boots
crossed negligently, his dark face an unreadable blank.  In his
arms Wade slept contentedly, a cleanly picked wishbone in his small
hand.  Scarlett always permitted Wade to sit up late when Rhett
called because the shy child was fond of him, and Rhett oddly
enough seemed to be fond of Wade.  Generally Scarlett was annoyed
by the child's presence, but he always behaved nicely in Rhett's
arms.  As for Aunt Pitty, she was nervously trying to stifle a
belch, for the rooster they had had for supper was a tough old
bird.

That morning Aunt Pitty had reached the regretful decision that she
had better kill the patriarch before he died of old age and pining
for his harem which had long since been eaten.  For days he had
drooped about the empty chicken run, too dispirited to crow.  After
Uncle Peter had wrung his neck, Aunt Pitty had been beset by
conscience at the thought of enjoying him, en famille, when so many
of her friends had not tasted chicken for weeks, so she suggested
company for dinner.  Melanie, who was now in her fifth month, had
not been out in public or received guests for weeks, and she was
appalled at the idea.  But Aunt Pitty, for once, was firm.  It
would be selfish to eat the rooster alone, and if Melanie would
only move her top hoop a little higher no one would notice anything
and she was so flat in the bust anyway.

"Oh, but Auntie I don't want to see people when Ashley--"

"It isn't as if Ashley were--had passed away," said Aunt Pitty, her
voice quavering, for in her heart she was certain Ashley was dead.
"He's just as much alive as you are and it will do you good to have
company.  And I'm going to ask Fanny Elsing, too.  Mrs. Elsing
begged me to try to do something to arouse her and make her see
people--"

"Oh, but Auntie, it's cruel to force her when poor Dallas has only
been dead--"

"Now, Melly, I shall cry with vexation if you argue with me.  I
guess I'm your auntie and I know what's what.  And I want a party."

So Aunt Pitty had her party, and, at the last minute, a guest she
did not expect, or desire, arrived.  Just when the smell of roast
rooster was filling the house, Rhett Butler, back from one of his
mysterious trips, knocked at the door, with a large box of bonbons
packed in paper lace under his arm and a mouthful of two-edged
compliments for her.  There was nothing to do but invite him to
stay, although Aunt Pitty knew how the doctor and Mrs. Meade felt
about him and how bitter Fanny was against any man not in uniform.
Neither the Meades nor the Elsings would have spoken to him on the
street, but in a friend's home they would, of course, have to be
polite to him.  Besides, he was now more firmly than ever under the
protection of the fragile Melanie.  After he had intervened for her
to get the news about Ashley, she had announced publicly that her
home was open to him as long as he lived and no matter what other
people might say about him.

Aunt Pitty's apprehensions quieted when she saw that Rhett was on
his best behavior.  He devoted himself to Fanny with such
sympathetic deference she even smiled at him, and the meal went
well.  It was a princely feast.  Carey Ashburn had brought a little
tea, which he had found in the tobacco pouch of a captured Yankee
en route to Andersonville, and everyone had a cup, faintly flavored
with tobacco.  There was a nibble of the tough old bird for each,
an adequate amount of dressing made of corn meal and seasoned with
onions, a bowl of dried peas, and plenty of rice and gravy, the
latter somewhat watery, for there was no flour with which to
thicken it.  For dessert, there was a sweet potato pie followed by
Rhett's bonbons, and when Rhett produced real Havana cigars for the
gentlemen to enjoy over their glass of blackberry wine, everyone
agreed it was indeed a Lucullan banquet.

When the gentlemen joined the ladies on the front porch, the talk
turned to war.  Talk always turned to war now, all conversations on
any topic led from war or back to war--sometimes sad, often gay,
but always war.  War romances, war weddings, deaths in hospitals
and on the field, incidents of camp and battle and march,
gallantry, cowardice, humor, sadness, deprivation and hope.
Always, always hope.  Hope firm, unshaken despite the defeats of
the summer before.

When Captain Ashburn announced he had applied for and been granted
transfer from Atlanta to the army at Dalton, the ladies kissed his
stiffened arm with their eyes and covered their emotions of pride
by declaring he couldn't go, for then who would beau them about?

Young Carey looked confused and pleased at hearing such statements
from settled matrons and spinsters like Mrs. Meade and Melanie and
Aunt Pitty and Fanny, and tried to hope that Scarlett really meant
it.

"Why, he'll be back in no time," said the doctor, throwing an arm
over Carey's shoulder.  "There'll be just one brief skirmish and
the Yankees will skedaddle back into Tennessee.  And when they get
there, General Forrest will take care of them.  You ladies need
have no alarm about the proximity of the Yankees, for General
Johnston and his army stands there in the mountains like an iron
rampart.  Yes, an iron rampart," he repeated, relishing his phrase.
"Sherman will never pass.  He'll never dislodge Old Joe."

The ladies smiled approvingly, for his lightest utterance was
regarded as incontrovertible truth.  After all, men understood
these matters much better than women, and if he said General
Johnston was an iron rampart, he must be one.  Only Rhett spoke.
He had been silent since supper and had sat in the twilight
listening to the war talk with a down-twisted mouth, holding the
sleeping child against his shoulder.

"I believe that rumor has it that Sherman has over one hundred
thousand men, now that his reinforcements have come up?"

The doctor answered him shortly.  He had been under considerable
strain ever since he first arrived and found that one of his fellow
diners was this man whom he disliked so heartily.  Only the respect
due Miss Pittypat and his presence under her roof as a guest had
restrained him from showing his feelings more obviously.

"Well, sir?" the doctor barked in reply.

"I believe Captain Ashburn said just a while ago that General
Johnston had only about forty thousand, counting the deserters who
were encouraged to come back to the colors by the last victory."

"Sir," said Mrs. Meade indignantly.  "There are no deserters in the
Confederate army."

"I beg your pardon," said Rhett with mock humility.  "I meant those
thousands on furlough who forgot to rejoin their regiments and
those who have been over their wounds for six months but who remain
at home, going about their usual business or doing the spring
plowing."

His eyes gleamed and Mrs. Meade bit her lip in a huff.  Scarlett
wanted to giggle at her discomfiture, for Rhett had caught her
fairly.  There were hundreds of men skulking in the swamps and the
mountains, defying the provost guard to drag them back to the army.
They were the ones who declared it was a "rich man's war and a poor
man's fight" and they had had enough of it.  But outnumbering these
by far were men who, though carried on company rolls as deserters,
had no intention of deserting permanently.  They were the ones who
had waited three years in vain for furloughs and while they waited
received ill-spelled letters from home:  "We air hungry"  "There
won't be no crop this year--there ain't nobody to plow."  "We air
hungry."  "The commissary took the shoats, and we ain't had no
money from you in months.  We air livin' on dried peas."

Always the rising chorus swelled:  "We are hungry, your wife, your
babies, your parents.  When will it be over?  When will you come
home?  We are hungry, hungry."  When furloughs from the rapidly
thinning army were denied, these soldiers went home without them,
to plow their land and plant their crops, repair their houses and
build up their fences.  When regimental officers, understanding the
situation, saw a hard fight ahead, they wrote these men, telling
them to rejoin their companies and no questions would be asked.
Usually the men returned when they saw that hunger at home would be
held at bay for a few months longer.  "Plow furloughs" were not
looked upon in the same light as desertion in the face of the
enemy, but they weakened the army just the same.

Dr. Meade hastily bridged over the uncomfortable pause, his voice
cold:  "Captain Butler, the numerical difference between our troops
and those of the Yankees has never mattered.  One Confederate is
worth a dozen Yankees."

The ladies nodded.  Everyone knew that.

"That was true at the first of the war," said Rhett.  "Perhaps it's
still true, provided the Confederate soldier has bullets for his
gun and shoes on his feet and food in his stomach.  Eh, Captain
Ashburn?"

His voice was still soft and filled with specious humility.  Carey
Ashburn looked unhappy, for it was obvious that he, too, disliked
Rhett intensely.  He gladly would have sided with the doctor but he
could not lie.  The reason he had applied for transfer to the
front, despite his useless arm, was that he realized, as the
civilian population did not, the seriousness of the situation.
There were many other men, stumping on wooden pegs, blind in one
eye, fingers blown away, one arm gone, who were quietly transferring
from the commissariat, hospital duties, mail and railroad service
back to their old fighting units.  They knew Old Joe needed every
man.

He did not speak and Dr. Meade thundered, losing his temper:  "Our
men have fought without shoes before and without food and won
victories.  And they will fight again and win!  I tell you General
Johnston cannot be dislodged!  The mountain fastnesses have always
been the refuge and the strong forts of invaded peoples from
ancient times.  Think of--think of Thermopylae!"

Scarlett thought hard but Thermopylae meant nothing to her.

"They died to the last man at Thermopylae, didn't they, Doctor?"
Rhett asked, and his lips twitched with suppressed laughter.

"Are you being insulting, young man?"

"Doctor!  I beg of you!  You misunderstood me!  I merely asked for
information.  My memory of ancient history is poor."

"If need be, our army will die to the last man before they permit
the Yankees to advance farther into Georgia," snapped the doctor.
"But it will not be.  They will drive them out of Georgia in one
skirmish."

Aunt Pittypat rose hastily and asked Scarlett to favor them with a
piano selection and a song.  She saw that the conversation was
rapidly getting into deep and stormy water.  She had known very
well there would be trouble if she invited Rhett to supper.  There
was always trouble when he was present.  Just how he started it,
she never exactly understood.  Dear!  Dear!  What did Scarlett see
in the man?  And how could dear Melly defend him?

As Scarlett went obediently into the parlor, a silence fell on the
porch, a silence that pulsed with resentment toward Rhett.  How
could anyone not believe with heart and soul in the invincibility
of General Johnston and his men?  Believing was a sacred duty.  And
those who were so traitorous as not to believe should, at least,
have the decency to keep their mouths shut.

Scarlett struck a few chords and her voice floated out to them from
the parlor, sweetly, sadly, in the words of a popular song:


"Into a ward of whitewashed walls
Where the dead and dying lay--
Wounded with bayonets, shells and balls--
Somebody's darling was borne one day.

"Somebody's darling! so young and so brave!
Wearing still on his pale, sweet face--
Soon to be hid by the dust of the grave--
The lingering light of his boyhood's grace."


"Matted and damp are the curls of gold," mourned Scarlett's faulty
soprano, and Fanny half rose and said in a faint, strangled voice:
"Sing something else!"

The piano was suddenly silent as Scarlett was overtaken with
surprise and embarrassment.  Then she hastily blundered into the
opening bars of "Jacket of Gray" and stopped with a discord as she
remembered how heartrending that selection was too.  The piano was
silent again for she was utterly at a loss.  All the songs had to
do with death and parting and sorrow.

Rhett rose swiftly, deposited Wade in Fanny's lap, and went into
the parlor.

"Play 'My Old Kentucky Home,'" he suggested smoothly, and Scarlett
gratefully plunged into it.  Her voice was joined by Rhett's
excellent bass, and as they went into the second verse those on the
porch breathed more easily, though Heaven knew it was none too
cheery a song, either.


"Just a few more days for to tote the weary load!
No matter, 'twill never be light!
Just a few more days, till we totter in the road!
Then, my old Kentucky home, good night!"



Dr. Meade's prediction was right--as far as it went.  Johnston did
stand like an iron rampart in the mountains above Dalton, one
hundred miles away.  So firmly did he stand and so bitterly did he
contest Sherman's desire to pass down the valley toward Atlanta
that finally the Yankees drew back and took counsel with
themselves.  They could not break the gray lines by direct assault
and so, under cover of night, they marched through the mountain
passes in a semicircle, hoping to come upon Johnston's rear and cut
the railroad behind him at Resaca, fifteen miles below Dalton.

With those precious twin lines of iron in danger, the Confederates
left their desperately defended rifle pits and, under the
starlight, made a forced march to Resaca by the short, direct road.
When the Yankees, swarming out of the hills, came upon them, the
Southern troops were waiting for them, entrenched behind
breastworks, batteries planted, bayonets gleaming, even as they had
been at Dalton.

When the wounded from Dalton brought in garbled accounts of Old
Joe's retreat to Resaca, Atlanta was surprised and a little
disturbed.  It was as though a small, dark cloud had appeared in
the northwest, the first cloud of a summer storm.  What was the
General thinking about, letting the Yankees penetrate eighteen
miles farther into Georgia?  The mountains were natural fortresses,
even as Dr. Meade had said.  Why hadn't Old Joe held the Yankees
there?

Johnston fought desperately at Resaca and repulsed the Yankees
again, but Sherman, employing the same flanking movement, swung his
vast army in another semicircle, crossed the Oostanaula River and
again struck at the railroad in the Confederate rear.  Again the
gray lines were summoned swiftly from their red ditches to defend
the railroad, and, weary for sleep, exhausted from marching and
fighting, and hungry, always hungry, they made another rapid march
down the valley.  They reached the little town of Calhoun, six
miles below Resaca, ahead of the Yankees, entrenched and were again
ready for the attack when the Yankees came up.  The attack came,
there was fierce skirmishing and the Yankees were beaten back.
Wearily the Confederates lay on their arms and prayed for respite
and rest.  But there was no rest.  Sherman inexorably advanced,
step by step, swinging his army about them in a wide curve, forcing
another retreat to defend the railroad at their back.

The Confederates marched in their sleep, too tired to think for the
most part.  But when they did think, they trusted old Joe.  They
knew they were retreating but they knew they had not been beaten.
They just didn't have enough men to hold their entrenchments and
defeat Sherman's flanking movements, too.  They could and did lick
the Yankees every time the Yankees would stand and fight.  What
would be the end of this retreat, they did not know.  But Old Joe
knew what he was doing and that was enough for them.  He had
conducted the retreat in masterly fashion, for they had lost few
men and the Yankees killed and captured ran high.  They hadn't lost
a single wagon and only four guns.  And they hadn't lost the
railroad at their back, either.  Sherman hadn't laid a finger on it
for all his frontal attacks, cavalry dashes and flank movements.

The railroad.  It was still theirs, that slender iron line winding
through the sunny valley toward Atlanta.  Men lay down to sleep
where they could see the rails gleaming faintly in the starlight.
Men lay down to die, and the last sight that met their puzzled eyes
was the rails shining in the merciless sun, heat shimmering along
them.

As they fell back down the valley, an army of refugees fell back
before them.  Planters and Crackers, rich and poor, black and
white, women and children, the old, the dying, the crippled, the
wounded, the women far gone in pregnancy, crowded the road to
Atlanta on trains, afoot, on horseback, in carriages and wagons
piled high with trunks and household goods.  Five miles ahead of
the retreating army went the refugees, halting at Resaca, at
Calhoun, at Kingston, hoping at each stop to hear that the Yankees
had been driven back so they could return to their homes.  But
there was no retracing that sunny road.  The gray troops passed by
empty mansions, deserted farms, lonely cabins with doors ajar.
Here and there some lone woman remained with a few frightened
slaves, and they came to the road to cheer the soldiers, to bring
buckets of well water for the thirsty men, to bind up the wounds
and bury the dead in their own family burying grounds.  But for the
most part the sunny valley was abandoned and desolate and the
untended crops stood in parching fields.

Flanked again at Calhoun, Johnston fell back to Adairsville, where
there was sharp skirmishing, then to Cassville, then south of
Cartersville.  And the enemy had now advanced fifty-five miles from
Dalton.  At New Hope Church, fifteen miles farther along the hotly
fought way, the gray ranks dug in for a determined stand.  On came
the blue lines, relentlessly, like a monster serpent, coiling,
striking venomously, drawing its injured lengths back, but always
striking again.  There was desperate fighting at New Hope Church,
eleven days of continuous fighting, with every Yankee assault
bloodily repulsed.  Then Johnston, flanked again, withdrew his
thinning lines a few miles farther.

The Confederate dead and wounded at New Hope Church ran high.  The
wounded flooded Atlanta in train-loads and the town was appalled.
Never, even after the battle of Chickamauga, had the town seen so
many wounded.  The hospitals overflowed and wounded lay on the
floors of empty stores and upon cotton bales in the warehouses.
Every hotel, boarding house and private residence was crowded with
sufferers.  Aunt Pitty had her share, although she protested that
it was most unbecoming to have strange men in the house when
Melanie was in a delicate condition and when gruesome sights might
bring on premature birth.  But Melanie reefed up her top hoop a
little higher to hide her thickening figure and the wounded invaded
the brick house.  There was endless cooking and lifting and turning
and fanning, endless hours of washing and rerolling bandages and
picking lint, and endless warm nights made sleepless by the
babbling delirium of men in the next room.  Finally the choked town
could take care of no more and the overflow of wounded was sent on
to the hospitals at Macon and Augusta.

With this backwash of wounded bearing conflicting reports and the
increase of frightened refugees crowding into the already crowded
town, Atlanta was in an uproar.  The small cloud on the horizon had
blown up swiftly into a large, sullen storm cloud and it was as
though a faint, chilling wind blew from it.

No one had lost faith in the invincibility of the troops but
everyone, the civilians at least, had lost faith in the General.
New Hope Church was only thirty-five miles from Atlanta!  The
General had let the Yankees push him back sixty-five miles in three
weeks!  Why didn't he hold the Yankees instead of everlastingly
retreating?  He was a fool and worse than a fool.  Graybeards in
the Home Guard and members of the state militia, safe in Atlanta,
insisted they could have managed the campaign better and drew maps
on tablecloths to prove their contentions.  As his lines grew
thinner and he was forced back farther, the General called
desperately on Governor Brown for these very men, but the state
troops felt reasonably safe.  After all, the Governor had defied
Jeff Davis' demand for them.  Why should he accede to General
Johnston?

Fight and fall back!  Fight and fall back!  For seventy miles and
twenty-five days the Confederates had fought almost daily.  New
Hope Church was behind the gray troops now, a memory in a mad haze
of like memories, heat, dust, hunger, weariness, tramp-tramp on the
red rutted roads, slop-slop through the red mud, retreat, entrench,
fight--retreat, entrench, fight.  New Hope Church was a nightmare
of another life and so was Big Shanty, where they turned and fought
the Yankees like demons.  But, fight the Yankees till the fields
were blue with dead, there were always more Yankees, fresh Yankees;
there was always that sinister southeast curving of the blue lines
toward the Confederate rear, toward the railroad--and toward
Atlanta!

From Big Shanty, the weary sleepless lines retreated down the road
to Kennesaw Mountain, near the little town of Marietta, and here
they spread their lines in a ten-mile curve.  On the steep sides of
the mountain they dug their rifle pits and on the towering heights
they planted their batteries.  Swearing, sweating men hauled the
heavy guns up the precipitous slopes, for mules could not climb the
hillsides.  Couriers and wounded coming into Atlanta gave
reassuring reports to the frightened townspeople.  The heights of
Kennesaw were impregnable.  So were Pine Mountain and Lost Mountain
near by which were also fortified.  The Yankees couldn't dislodge
Old Joe's men and they could hardly flank them now for the
batteries on the mountain tops commanded all the roads for miles.
Atlanta breathed more easily, but--

But Kennesaw Mountain was only twenty-two miles away!

On the day when the first wounded from Kennesaw Mountain were
coming in, Mrs. Merriwether's carriage was at Aunt Pitty's house at
the unheard-of hour of seven in the morning, and black Uncle Levi
sent up word that Scarlett must dress immediately and come to the
hospital.  Fanny Elsing and the Bonnell girls, roused early from
slumber, were yawning on the back seat and the Elsings' mammy sat
grumpily on the box, a basket of freshly laundered bandages on her
lap.  Off Scarlett went, unwillingly for she had danced till dawn
the night before at the Home Guard's party and her feet were tired.
She silently cursed the efficient and indefatigable Mrs.
Merriwether, the wounded and the whole Southern Confederacy, as
Prissy buttoned her in her oldest and raggedest calico frock which
she used for hospital work.  Gulping down the bitter brew of
parched corn and dried sweet potatoes that passed for coffee, she
went out to join the girls.

She was sick of all this nursing.  This very day she would tell
Mrs. Merriwether that Ellen had written her to come home for a
visit.  Much good this did her, for that worthy matron, her sleeves
rolled up, her stout figure swathed in a large apron, gave her one
sharp look and said:  "Don't let me hear any more such foolishness,
Scarlett Hamilton.  I'll write your mother today and tell her how
much we need you, and I'm sure she'll understand and let you stay.
Now, put on your apron and trot over to Dr. Meade.  He needs
someone to help with the dressings."

"Oh, God," thought Scarlett drearily, "that's just the trouble.
Mother will make me stay here and I shall die if I have to smell
these stinks any longer!  I wish I was an old lady so I could bully
the young ones, instead of getting bullied--and tell old cats like
Mrs. Merriwether to go to Halifax!"

Yes, she was sick of the hospital, the foul smells, the lice, the
aching, unwashed bodies.  If there had ever been any novelty and
romance about nursing, that had worn off a year ago.  Besides,
these men wounded in the retreat were not so attractive as the
earlier ones had been.  They didn't show the slightest interest in
her and they had very little to say beyond:  "How's the fightin'
goin'?  What's Old Joe doin' now?  Mighty clever fellow, Old Joe."
She didn't think Old Joe a mighty clever fellow.  All he had done
was let the Yankees penetrate eighty-eight miles into Georgia.  No,
they were not an attractive lot.  Moreover, many of them were
dying, dying swiftly, silently, having little strength left to
combat the blood poisoning, gangrene, typhoid and pneumonia which
had set in before they could reach Atlanta and a doctor.

The day was hot and the flies came in the open windows in swarms,
fat lazy flies that broke the spirits of the men as pain could not.
The tide of smells and pain rose and rose about her.  Perspiration
soaked through her freshly starched dress as she followed Dr. Meade
about, a basin in her hand.

Oh, the nausea of standing by the doctor, trying not to vomit when
his bright knife cut into mortifying flesh!  And oh, the horror of
hearing the screams from the operating ward where amputations were
going on!  And the sick, helpless sense of pity at the sight of
tense, white faces of mangled men waiting for the doctor to get to
them, men whose ears were filled with screams, men waiting for the
dreadful words:  "I'm sorry, my boy, but that hand will have to
come off.  Yes, yes, I know; but look, see those red streaks?
It'll have to come off."

Chloroform was so scarce now it was used only for the worst
amputations and opium was a precious thing, used only to ease the
dying out of life, not the living out of pain.  There was no
quinine and no iodine at all.  Yes, Scarlett was sick of it all,
and that morning she wished that she, like Melanie, had the excuse
of pregnancy to offer.  That was about the only excuse that was
socially acceptable for not nursing these days.

When noon came, she put off her apron and sneaked away from the
hospital while Mrs. Merriwether was busy writing a letter for a
gangling, illiterate mountaineer.  Scarlett felt that she could
stand it no longer.  It was an imposition on her and she knew that
when the wounded came in on the noon train there would be enough
work to keep her busy until night-fall--and probably without
anything to eat.

She went hastily up the two short blocks to Peachtree Street,
breathing the unfouled air in as deep gulps as her tightly laced
corset would permit.  She was standing on the corner, uncertain as
to what she would do next, ashamed to go home to Aunt Pitty's but
determined not to go back to the hospital, when Rhett Butler drove
by.

"You look like the ragpicker's child," he observed, his eyes taking
in the mended lavender calico, streaked with perspiration and
splotched here and there with water which had slopped from the
basin.  Scarlett was furious with embarrassment and indignation.
Why did he always notice women's clothing and why was he so rude as
to remark upon her present untidiness?

"I don't want to hear a word out of you.  You get out and help me
in and drive me somewhere where nobody will see me.  I won't go
back to the hospital if they hang me!  My goodness, I didn't start
this war and I don't see any reason why I should be worked to death
and--"

"A traitor to Our Glorious Cause!"

"The pot's calling the kettle black.  You help me in.  I don't care
where you were going.  You're going to take me riding now."

He swung himself out of the carriage to the ground and she suddenly
thought how nice it was to see a man who was whole, who was not
minus eyes or limbs, or white with pain or yellow with malaria, and
who looked well fed and healthy.  He was so well dressed too.  His
coat and trousers were actually of the same material and they
fitted him, instead of hanging in folds or being almost too tight
for movement.  And they were new, not ragged, with dirty bare flesh
and hairy legs showing through.  He looked as if he had not a care
in the world and that in itself was startling these days, when
other men wore such worried, preoccupied, grim looks.  His brown
face was bland and his mouth, red lipped, clear cut as a woman's,
frankly sensual, smiled carelessly as he lifted her into the
carriage.

The muscles of his big body rippled against his well-tailored
clothes, as he got in beside her, and, as always, the sense of his
great physical power struck her like a blow.  She watched the swell
of his powerful shoulders against the cloth with a fascination that
was disturbing, a little frightening.  His body seemed so tough and
hard, as tough and hard as his keen mind.  His was such an easy,
graceful strength, lazy as a panther stretching in the sun, alert
as a panther to spring and strike.

"You little fraud," he said, clucking to the horse.  "You dance all
night with the soldiers and give them roses and ribbons and tell
them how you'd die for the Cause, and when it comes to bandaging a
few wounds and picking off a few lice, you decamp hastily."

"Can't you talk about something else and drive faster?  It would be
just my luck for Grandpa Merriwether to come out of his store and
see me and tell old lady--I mean, Mrs. Merriwether."

He touched up the mare with the whip and she trotted briskly across
Five Points and across the railroad tracks that cut the town in
two.  The train bearing the wounded had already come in and the
litter bearers were working swiftly in the hot sun, transferring
wounded into ambulances and covered ordnance wagons.  Scarlett had
no qualm of conscience as she watched them but only a feeling of
vast relief that she had made her escape.

"I'm just sick and tired of that old hospital," she said, settling
her billowing skirts and tying her bonnet bow more firmly under her
chin.  "And every day more and more wounded come in.  It's all
General Johnston's fault.  If he'd just stood up to the Yankees at
Dalton, they'd have--"

"But he did stand up to the Yankees, you ignorant child.  And if
he'd kept on standing there, Sherman would have flanked him and
crushed him between the two wings of his army.  And he'd have lost
the railroad and the railroad is what Johnston is fighting for."

"Oh, well," said Scarlett, on whom military strategy was utterly
lost.  "It's his fault anyway.  He ought to have done something
about it and I think he ought to be removed.  Why doesn't he stand
and fight instead of retreating?"

"You are like everyone else, screaming 'Off with his head' because
he can't do the impossible.  He was Jesus the Savior at Dalton, and
now he's Judas the Betrayer at Kennesaw Mountain, all in six weeks.
Yet, just let him drive the Yankees back twenty miles and he'll be
Jesus again.  My child, Sherman has twice as many men as Johnston,
and he can afford to lose two men for every one of our gallant
laddies.  And Johnston can't afford to lose a single man.  He needs
reinforcements badly and what is he getting?  'Joe Brown's Pets.'
What a help they'll be!"

"Is the militia really going to be called out?  The Home Guard,
too?  I hadn't heard.  How do you know?"

"There's a rumor floating about to that effect.  The rumor arrived
on the train from Milledgeville this morning.  Both the militia and
the Home Guards are going to be sent in to reinforce General
Johnston.  Yes, Governor Brown's darlings are likely to smell
powder at last, and I imagine most of them will be much surprised.
Certainly they never expected to see action.  The Governor as good
as promised them they wouldn't.  Well, that's a good joke on them.
They thought they had bomb proofs because the Governor stood up to
even Jeff Davis and refused to send them to Virginia.  Said they
were needed for the defense of their state.  Who'd have ever
thought the war would come to their own back yard and they'd really
have to defend their state?"

"Oh, how can you laugh, you cruel thing!  Think of the old
gentlemen and the little boys in the Home Guard!  Why, little Phil
Meade will have to go and Grandpa Merriwether and Uncle Henry
Hamilton."

"I'm not talking about the little boys and the Mexican War
veterans.  I'm talking about brave young men like Willie Guinan who
like to wear pretty uniforms and wave swords--"

"And yourself!"

"My dear, that didn't hurt a bit!  I wear no uniform and wave no
sword and the fortunes of the Confederacy mean nothing at all to
me.  Moreover, I wouldn't be caught dead in the Home Guard or in
any army, for that matter.  I had enough of things military at West
Point to do me the rest of my life. . . .  Well, I wish Old Joe
luck.  General Lee can't send him any help because the Yankees are
keeping him busy in Virginia.  So the Georgia state troops are the
only reinforcements Johnston can get.  He deserves better, for he's
a great strategist.  He always manages to get places before the
Yankees do.  But he'll have to keep falling back if he wants to
protect the railroad; and mark my words, when they push him out of
the mountains and onto the flatter land around here, he's going to
be butchered."

"Around here?" cried Scarlett.  "You know mighty well the Yankees
will never get this far!"

"Kennesaw is only twenty-two miles away and I'll wager you--"

"Rhett, look, down the street!  That crowd of men!  They aren't
soldiers.  What on earth . . . ?  Why, they're darkies!"

There was a great cloud of red dust coming up the street and from
the cloud came the sound of the tramping of many feet and a hundred
or more negro voices, deep throated, careless, singing a hymn.
Rhett pulled the carriage over to the curb, and Scarlett looked
curiously at the sweating black men, picks and shovels over their
shoulders, shepherded along by an officer and a squad of men
wearing the insignia of the engineering corps.

"What on earth . . . ?" she began again.

Then her eyes lighted on a singing black buck in the front rank.
He stood nearly six and a half feet tall, a giant of a man, ebony
black, stepping along with the lithe grace of a powerful animal,
his white teeth flashing as he led the gang in "Go Down, Moses."
Surely there wasn't a negro on earth as tall and loud voiced as
this one except Big Sam, the foreman of Tara.  But what was Big Sam
doing here, so far away from home, especially now that there was no
overseer on the plantation and he was Gerald's right-hand man?

As she half rose from her seat to look closer, the giant caught
sight of her and his black face split in a grin of delighted
recognition.  He halted, dropped his shovel and started toward her,
calling to the negroes nearest him:  "Gawdlmighty!  It's Miss
Scarlett!  You, 'Lige!  'Postle!  Prophet!  Dar's Miss Scarlett!"

There was confusion in the ranks.  The crowd halted uncertainly,
grinning, and Big Sam, followed by three other large negroes, ran
across the road to the carriage, closely followed by the harried,
shouting officer.

"Get back in line, you fellows!  Get back, I tell you or I'll--
Why it's Mrs. Hamilton.  Good morning, Ma'm, and you, too, sir.
What are you up to inciting mutiny and insubordination?  God knows,
I've had trouble enough with these boys this morning."

"Oh, Captain Randall, don't scold them!  They are our people.  This
is Big Sam our foreman, and Elijah and Apostle and Prophet from
Tara.  Of course, they had to speak to me.  How are you, boys?"

She shook hands all around, her small white hand disappearing into
their huge black paws and the four capered with delight at the
meeting and with pride at displaying before their comrades what a
pretty Young Miss they had.

"What are you boys doing so far from Tara?  You've run away, I'll
be bound.  Don't you know the patterollers will get you sure?"

They bellowed pleasedly at the badinage.

"Runned away?" answered Big Sam.  "No'm, us ain' runned away.  Dey
done sont an' tuck us, kase us wuz de fo' bigges' an' stronges'
han's at Tara."  His white teeth showed proudly.  "Dey specially
sont fer me, kase Ah could sing so good.  Yas'm, Mist' Frank
Kennedy, he come by an' tuck us."

"But why, Big Sam?"

"Lawd, Miss Scarlett!  Ain' you heerd?  Us is ter dig de ditches
fer de wite gempmums ter hide in w'en de Yankees comes."

Captain Randall and the occupants of the carriage smothered smiles
at this naive explanation of rifle pits.

"Cose, Mis' Gerald might' nigh had a fit w'en dey tuck me, an' he
say he kain run de place widout me.  But Miss Ellen she say:  'Tek
him, Mist' Kennedy.  De Confedrutsy need Big Sam mo' dan us do.'
An' she gib me a dollar an' tell me ter do jes' whut de w'ite
gempmums tell me.  So hyah us is."

"What does it all mean, Captain Randall?"

"Oh, it's quite simple.  We have to strengthen the fortifications
of Atlanta with more miles of rifle pits, and the General can't
spare any men from the front to do it.  So we've been impressing
the strongest bucks in the countryside for the work."

"But--"

A cold little fear was beginning to throb in Scarlett's breast.
More miles of rifle pits!  Why should they need more?  Within the
last year, a series of huge earth redoubts with battery
emplacements had been built all around Atlanta, one mile from the
center of town.  These great earth-works were connected with rifle
pits and they ran, mile after mile, completely encircling the city.
More rifle pits!

"But--why should we be fortified any more than we are already
fortified?  We won't need what we've got.  Surely, the General
won't let--"

"Our present fortifications are only a mile from town," said
Captain Randall shortly.  "And that's too close for comfort--or
safety.  These new ones are going to be farther away.  You see,
another retreat may bring our men into Atlanta."

Immediately he regretted his last remark, as her eyes widened with
fear.

"But, of course there won't be another retreat," he added hastily.
"The lines around Kennesaw Mountain are impregnable.  The batteries
are planted all up the mountain sides and they command the roads,
and the Yankees can't possibly get by."

But Scarlett saw him drop his eyes before the lazy, penetrating
look Rhett gave him, and she was frightened.  She remembered
Rhett's remark:  "When the Yankees push him out of the mountains
and onto the flatter land, he'll be butchered."

"Oh, Captain, do you think--"

"Why, of course not!  Don't fret your mind one minute.  Old Joe
just believes in taking precautions.  That's the only reason we're
digging more entrenchments. . . .  But I must be going now.  It's
been pleasant, talking to you. . . .  Say good-by to your mistress,
boys, and let's get going."

"Good-by, boys.  Now, if you get sick or hurt or in trouble, let me
know.  I live right down Peachtree Street, down there in almost the
last house at the end of town.  Wait a minute--"  She fumbled in
her reticule.  "Oh, dear, I haven't a cent.  Rhett, give me a few
shinplasters.  Here, Big Sam, buy some tobacco for yourself and the
boys.  And be good and do what Captain Randall tells you."

The straggling line re-formed, the dust arose again in a red cloud
as they moved off and Big Sam started up the singing again.


"Go do-ow, Mos-es!  Waaa-ay, do-own, in Eeejup laa-an!
An' te-el O-le Faa-ro-o
Ter let mah--peee-pul go!"


"Rhett, Captain Randall was lying to me, just like all the men do--
trying to keep the truth from us women for fear we'll faint.  Or
was he lying?  Oh, Rhett, if there's no danger, why are they
digging these new breastworks?  Is the army so short of men they've
got to use darkies?"

Rhett clucked to the mare.

"The army is damned short of men.  Why else would the Home Guard be
called out?  And as for the entrenchments, well, fortifications are
supposed to be of some value in case of a siege.  The General is
preparing to make his final stand here."

"A siege!  Oh, turn the horse around.  I'm going home, back home to
Tara, right away."

"What ails you?"

"A siege!  Name of God, a siege!  I've heard about sieges!  Pa was
in one or maybe it was his Pa, and Pa told me--"

"What siege?"

"The siege at Drogheda when Cromwell had the Irish, and they didn't
have anything to eat and Pa said they starved and died in the
streets and finally they ate all the cats and rats and even things
like cockroaches.  And he said they ate each other too, before they
surrendered, though I never did know whether to believe that or
not.  And when Cromwell took the town all the women were--  A
siege!  Mother of God!"

"You are the most barbarously ignorant young person I ever saw.
Drogheda was in sixteen hundred and something and Mr. O'Hara
couldn't possibly have been alive then.  Besides, Sherman isn't
Cromwell."

"No, but he's worse!  They say--"

"And as for the exotic viands the Irish ate at the siege--
personally I'd as soon eat a nice juicy rat as some of the victuals
they've been serving me recently at the hotel.  I think I shall
have to go back to Richmond.  They have good food there, if you
have the money to pay for it."  His eyes mocked the fear in her
face.

Annoyed that she had shown her trepidation, she cried:  "I don't
see why you've stayed here this long!  All you think about is being
comfortable and eating and--and things like that."

"I know no more pleasant way to pass the time than in eating and
er--things like that," he said.  "And as for why I stay here--well,
I've read a good deal about sieges, beleaguered cities and the
like, but I've never seen one.  So I think I'll stay here and
watch.  I won't get hurt because I'm a noncombatant and besides I
want the experience.  Never pass up new experiences, Scarlett.
They enrich the mind."

"My mind's rich enough."

"Perhaps you know best about that, but I should say--  But that
would be ungallant.  And perhaps, I'm staying here to rescue you
when the siege does come.  I've never rescued a maiden in distress.
That would be a new experience, too."

She knew he was teasing her but she sensed a seriousness behind his
words.  She tossed her head.

"I won't need you to rescue me.  I can take care of myself, thank
you."

"Don't say that, Scarlett!  Think of it, if you like, but never,
never say it to a man.  That's the trouble with Yankee girls.
They'd be most charming if they weren't always telling you that
they can take care of themselves, thank you.  Generally they are
telling the truth, God help them.  And so men let them take care of
themselves."

"How you do run on," she said coldly, for there was no insult worse
than being likened to a Yankee girl.  "I believe you're lying about
a siege.  You know the Yankees will never get to Atlanta."

"I'll bet you they will be here within the month.  I'll bet you a
box of bonbons against--"  His dark eyes wandered to her lips.
"Against a kiss."

For a last brief moment, fear of a Yankee invasion clutched her
heart but at the word "kiss," she forgot about it.  This was
familiar ground and far more interesting than military operations.
With difficulty she restrained a smile of glee.  Since the day when
he gave her the green bonnet, Rhett had made no advances which
could in any way be construed as those of a lover.  He could never
be inveigled into personal conversations, try though she might, but
now with no angling on her part, he was talking about kissing.

"I don't care for such personal conversation," she said coolly and
managed a frown.  "Besides, I'd just as soon kiss a pig."

"There's no accounting for tastes and I've always heard the Irish
were partial to pigs--kept them under their beds, in fact.  But,
Scarlett, you need kissing badly.  That's what's wrong with you.
All your beaux have respected you too much, though God knows why,
or they have been too afraid of you to really do right by you.  The
result is that you are unendurably uppity.  You should be kissed
and by someone who knows how."

The conversation was not going the way she wanted it.  It never did
when she was with him.  Always, it was a duel in which she was
worsted.

"And I suppose you think you are the proper person?" she asked with
sarcasm, holding her temper in check with difficulty.

"Oh, yes, if I cared to take the trouble," he said carelessly.
"They say I kiss very well."

"Oh," she began, indignant at the slight to her charms.  "Why,
you . . ."  But her eyes fell in sudden confusion.  He was smiling,
but in the dark depths of his eyes a tiny light flickered for a
brief moment, like a small raw flame.

"Of course, you've probably wondered why I never tried to follow up
that chaste peck I gave you, the day I brought you that bonnet--"

"I have never--"

"Then you aren't a nice girl, Scarlett, and I'm sorry to hear it.
All really nice girls wonder when men don't try to kiss them.  They
know they shouldn't want them to and they know they must act
insulted if they do, but just the same, they wish the men would
try. . . .  Well, my dear, take heart.  Some day, I will kiss you
and you will like it.  But not now, so I beg you not to be too
impatient."

She knew he was teasing but, as always, his teasing maddened her.
There was always too much truth in the things he said.  Well, this
finished him.  If ever, ever he should be so ill bred as to try to
take any liberties with her, she would show him.

"Will you kindly turn the horse around, Captain Butler?  I wish to
go back to the hospital."

"Do you indeed, my ministering angel?  Then lice and slops are
preferable to my conversation?  Well, far be it from me to keep a
pair of willing hands from laboring for Our Glorious Cause."  He
turned the horse's head and they started back toward Five Points.

"As to why I have made no further advances," he pursued blandly, as
though she had not signified that the conversation was at an end,
"I'm waiting for you to grow up a little more.  You see, it
wouldn't be much fun for me to kiss you now and I'm quite selfish
about my pleasures.  I never fancied kissing children."

He smothered a grin, as from the corner of his eye he saw her bosom
heave with silent wrath.

"And then, too," he continued softly, "I was waiting for the memory
of the estimable Ashley Wilkes to fade."

At the mention of Ashley's name, sudden pain went through her,
sudden hot tears stung her lids.  Fade?  The memory of Ashley would
never fade, not if he were dead a thousand years.  She thought of
Ashley wounded, dying in a far-off Yankee prison, with no blankets
over him, with no one who loved him to hold his hand, and she was
filled with hate for the well-fed man who sat beside her, jeers
just beneath the surface of his drawling voice.

She was too angry to speak and they rode along in silence for some
while.

"I understand practically everything about you and Ashley, now,"
Rhett resumed.  "I began with your inelegant scene at Twelve Oaks
and, since then, I've picked up many things by keeping my eyes
open.  What things?  Oh, that you still cherish a romantic
schoolgirl passion for him which he reciprocates as well as his
honorable nature will permit him.  And that Mrs. Wilkes knows
nothing and that, between the two of you, you've done her a pretty
trick.  I understand practically everything, except one thing that
piques my curiosity.  Did the honorable Ashley ever jeopardize his
immortal soul by kissing you?"

A stony silence and an averted head were his answers.

"Ah, well, so he did kiss you.  I suppose it was when he was here
on furlough.  And now that he's probably dead you are cherishing it
to your heart.  But I'm sure you'll get over it and when you've
forgotten his kiss, I'll--"

She turned in fury.

"You go to--Halifax," she said tensely, her green eyes slits of
rage.  "And let me out of this carriage before I jump over the
wheels.  And I don't ever want to speak to you again."

He stopped the carriage, but before he could alight and assist her
she sprang down.  Her hoop caught on the wheel and for a moment the
crowd at Five Points had a flashing view of petticoats and
pantalets.  Then Rhett leaned over and swiftly released it.  She
flounced off without a word, without even a backward look, and he
laughed softly and clicked to the horse.



CHAPTER XVIII


For the first time since the war began, Atlanta could hear the
sound of battle.  In the early morning hours before the noises of
the town awoke, the cannon at Kennesaw Mountain could be heard
faintly, far away, a low dim booming that might have passed for
summer thunder.  Occasionally it was loud enough to be heard even
above the rattle of traffic at noon.  People tried not to listen to
it, tried to talk, to laugh, to carry on their business, just as
though the Yankees were not there, twenty-two miles away, but
always ears were strained for the sound.  The town wore a
preoccupied look, for no matter what occupied their hands, all were
listening, listening, their hearts leaping suddenly a hundred times
a day.  Was the booming louder?  Or did they only think it was
louder?  Would General Johnston hold them this time?  Would he?

Panic lay just beneath the surface.  Nerves which had been
stretched tighter and tighter each day of the retreat began to
reach the breaking point.  No one spoke of fears.  That subject was
taboo, but strained nerves found expression in loud criticism of
the General.  Public feeling was at fever heat.  Sherman was at the
very doors of Atlanta.  Another retreat might bring the
Confederates into the town.

Give us a general who won't retreat!  Give us a man who will stand
and fight!

With the far-off rumbling of cannon in their ears, the state
militia, "Joe Brown's Pets," and the Home Guard marched out of
Atlanta, to defend the bridges and ferries of the Chattahoochee
River at Johnston's back.  It was a gray, overcast day and, as they
marched through Five Points and out the Marietta road, a fine rain
began to fall.  The whole town had turned out to see them off and
they stood, close packed, under the wooden awnings of the stores on
Peachtree Street and tried to cheer.

Scarlett and Maybelle Merriwether Picard had been given permission
to leave the hospital and watch the men go out, because Uncle Henry
Hamilton and Grandpa Merriwether were in the Home Guard, and they
stood with Mrs. Meade, pressed in the crowd, tiptoeing to get a
better view.  Scarlett, though filled with the universal Southern
desire to believe only the pleasantest and most reassuring things
about the progress of the fighting, felt cold as she watched the
motley ranks go by.  Surely, things must be in a desperate pass if
this rabble of bombproofers, old men and little boys were being
called out!  To be sure there were young and able-bodied men in the
passing lines, tricked out in the bright uniforms of socially
select militia units, plumes waving, sashes dancing.  But there
were so many old men and young boys, and the sight of them made her
heart contract with pity and with fear.  There were graybeards
older than her father trying to step jauntily along in the needle-
fine rain to the rhythm of the fife and drum corps.  Grandpa
Merriwether, with Mrs. Merriwether's best plaid shawl laid across
his shoulders to keep out the rain, was in the first rank and he
saluted the girls with a grin.  They waved their handkerchiefs and
cried gay good-bys to him; but Maybelle, gripping Scarlett's arm,
whispered:  "Oh, the poor old darling!  A real good rainstorm will
just about finish him!  His lumbago--"

Uncle Henry Hamilton marched in the rank behind Grandpa
Merriwether, the collar of his long black coat turned up about his
ears, two Mexican War pistols in his belt and a small carpetbag in
his hand.  Beside him marched his black valet who was nearly as old
as Uncle Henry, with an open umbrella held over them both.
Shoulder to shoulder with their elders came the young boys, none of
them looking over sixteen.  Many of them had run away from school
to join the army, and here and there were clumps of them in the
cadet uniforms of military academies, the black cock feathers on
their tight gray caps wet with rain, the clean white canvas straps
crossing their chests sodden.  Phil Meade was among them, proudly
wearing his dead brother's saber and horse pistols, his hat bravely
pinned up on one side.  Mrs. Meade managed to smile and wave until
he had passed and then she leaned her head on the back of
Scarlett's shoulder for a moment as though her strength had
suddenly left her.

Many of the men were totally unarmed, for the Confederacy had
neither rifles nor ammunition to issue to them.  These men hoped to
equip themselves from killed and captured Yankees.  Many carried
bowie knives in their boots and bore in their hands long thick
poles with iron-pointed tips known as "Joe Brown pikes."  The lucky
ones had old flintlock muskets slung over their shoulders and
powder-horns at their belts.

Johnston had lost around ten thousand men in his retreat.  He
needed ten thousand more fresh troops.  And this, thought Scarlett
frightened, is what he is getting!

As the artillery rumbled by, splashing mud into the watching
crowds, a negro on a mule, riding close to a cannon caught her eye.
He was a young, saddle-colored negro with a serious face, and when
Scarlett saw him she cried:  "It's Mose!  Ashley's Mose!  Whatever
is he doing here?"  She fought her way through the crowd to the
curb and called:  "Mose!  Stop!"

The boy seeing her, drew rein, smiled delightedly and started to
dismount.  A soaking sergeant, riding behind him, called:  "Stay on
that mule, boy, or I'll light a fire under you!  We got to git to
the mountain some time."

Uncertainly, Mose looked from the sergeant to Scarlett and she,
splashing through the mud, close to the passing wheels, caught at
Moses' stirrup strap.

"Oh, just a minute, Sergeant!  Don't get down, Mose.  What on earth
are you doing here?"

"Ah's off ter de war, agin, Miss Scarlett.  Dis time wid Ole Mist'
John 'stead ob Mist' Ashley."

"Mr. Wilkes!" Scarlett was stunned.  Mr. Wilkes was nearly seventy.
"Where is he?"

"Back wid de las' cannon, Miss Scarlett.  Back dar!"

"Sorry, lady.  Move on, boy!"

Scarlett stood for a moment, ankle deep in mud as the guns lurched
by.  Oh, no!  She thought.  It can't be.  He's too old.  And he
doesn't like war any more than Ashley did!  She retreated back a
few paces toward the curb and scanned each face that passed.  Then,
as the last cannon and limber chest came groaning and splashing up,
she saw him, slender, erect, his long silver hair wet upon his
neck, riding easily upon a little strawberry mare that picked her
way as daintily through the mud holes as a lady in a satin dress.
Why--that mare was Nellie!  Mrs. Tarleton's Nellie!  Beatrice
Tarleton's treasured darling!

When he saw her standing in the mud, Mr. Wilkes drew rein with a
smile of pleasure and, dismounting, came toward her.

"I had hoped to see you, Scarlett.  I was charged with so many
messages from your people.  But there was no time.  We just got in
this morning and they are rushing us out immediately, as you see."

"Oh, Mr. Wilkes," she cried desperately, holding his hand.  "Don't
go!  Why must you go?"

"Ah, so you think I'm too old!" he smiled, and it was Ashley's
smile in an older face.  "Perhaps I am too old to march but not to
ride and shoot.  And Mrs. Tarleton so kindly lent me Nellie, so I
am well mounted.  I hope nothing happens to Nellie, for if
something should happen to her, I could never go home and face Mrs.
Tarleton.  Nellie was the last horse she had left."  He was
laughing now, turning away her fears.  "Your mother and father and
the girls are well and they sent you their love.  Your father
nearly came up with us today!"

"Oh, not Pa!" cried Scarlett in terror.  "Not Pa!  He isn't going
to the war, is he?"

"No, but he was.  Of course, he can't walk far with his stiff knee,
but he was all for riding away with us.  Your mother agreed,
providing he was able to jump the pasture fence, for, she said,
there would be a lot of rough riding to be done in the army.  Your
father thought that easy, but--would you believe it?  When his
horse came to the fence, he stopped dead and over his head went
your father!  It's a wonder it didn't break his neck!  You know how
obstinate he is.  He got right up and tried it again.  Well,
Scarlett, he came off three times before Mrs. O'Hara and Pork
assisted him to bed.  He was in a taking about it, swearing that
your mother had 'spoken a wee word in the beast's ear.'  He just
isn't up to active service, Scarlett.  You need have no shame about
it.  After all, someone must stay home and raise crops for the
army."

Scarlett had no shame at all, only an active feeling of relief.

"I've sent India and Honey to Macon to stay with the Burrs and Mr.
O'Hara is looking after Twelve Oaks as well as Tara. . . .  I must
go, my dear.  Let me kiss your pretty face."

Scarlett turned up her lips and there was a choking pain in her
throat.  She was so fond of Mr. Wilkes.  Once, long ago, she had
hoped to be his daughter-in-law.

"And you must deliver this kiss to Pittypat and this to Melanie,"
he said, kissing her lightly two more times.  "And how is Melanie?"

"She is well."

"Ah!"  His eyes looked at her but through her, past her as Ashley's
had done, remote gray eyes looking on another world.  "I should
have liked to see my first grandchild.  Good-by, my dear."

He swung onto Nellie and cantered off, his hat in his hand, his
silver hair bare to the rain.  Scarlett had rejoined Maybelle and
Mrs. Meade before the import of his last words broke upon her.
Then in superstitious terror she crossed herself and tried to say a
prayer.  He had spoken of death, just as Ashley had done, and now
Ashley--  No one should ever speak of death!  It was tempting
Providence to mention death.  As the three women started silently
back to the hospital in the rain, Scarlett was praying:  "Not him,
too, God.  Not him and Ashley, too!"

The retreat from Dalton to Kennesaw Mountain had taken from early
May to mid-June and as the hot rainy days of June passed and
Sherman failed to dislodge the Confederates from the steep slippery
slopes, hope again raised its head.  Everyone grew more cheerful
and spoke more kindly of General Johnston.  As wet June days passed
into a wetter July and the Confederates, fighting desperately
around the entrenched heights, still held Sherman at bay, a wild
gaiety took hold of Atlanta.  Hope went to their heads like
champagne.  Hurrah!  Hurrah!  We're holding them!  An epidemic of
parties and dances broke out.  Whenever groups of men from the
fighting were in town for the night, dinners were given for them
and afterwards there was dancing and the girls, outnumbering the
men ten to one, made much of them and fought to dance with them.

Atlanta was crowded with visitors, refugees, families of wounded
men in the hospitals, wives and mothers of soldiers fighting at the
mountain who wished to be near them in case of wounds.  In
addition, bevies of belles from the country districts, where all
remaining men were under sixteen or over sixty, descended upon the
town.  Aunt Pitty disapproved highly of these last, for she felt
they had come to Atlanta for no reason at all except to catch
husbands, and the shamelessness of it made her wonder what the
world was coming to.  Scarlett disapproved, too.  She did not care
for the eager competition furnished by the sixteen-year-olds whose
fresh cheeks and bright smiles made one forget their twice-turned
frocks and patched shoes.  Her own clothes were prettier and newer
than most, thanks to the material Rhett Butler had brought her on
the last boat he ran in, but, after all, she was nineteen and
getting along and men had a way of chasing silly young things.

A widow with a child was at a disadvantage with these pretty
minxes, she thought.  But in these exciting days her widowhood and
her motherhood weighed less heavily upon her than ever before.
Between hospital duties in the day time and parties at night, she
hardly ever saw Wade.  Sometimes she actually forgot, for long
stretches, that she had a child.

In the warm wet summer nights, Atlanta's homes stood open to the
soldiers, the town's defenders.  The big houses from Washington
Street to Peachtree Street blazed with lights, as the muddy
fighters in from the rifle pits were entertained, and the sound of
banjo and fiddle and the scrape of dancing feet and light laughter
carried far on the night air.  Groups hung over pianos and voices
sang lustily the sad words of "Your Letter Came but Came Too Late"
while ragged gallants looked meaningly at girls who laughed from
behind turkey-tail fans, begging them not to wait until it was too
late.  None of the girls waited, if they could help it.  With the
tide of hysterical gaiety and excitement flooding the city, they
rushed into matrimony.  There were so many marriages that month
while Johnston was holding the enemy at Kennesaw Mountain,
marriages with the bride turned out in blushing happiness and the
hastily borrowed finery of a dozen friends and the groom with saber
banging at patched knees.  So much excitement, so many parties, so
many thrills!  Hurrah!  Johnston is holding the Yanks twenty-two
miles away!



Yes, the lines around Kennesaw Mountain were impregnable.  After
twenty-five days of fighting, even General Sherman was convinced of
this, for his losses were enormous.  Instead of continuing the
direct assault, he swung his army in a wide circle again and tried
to come between the Confederates and Atlanta.  Again, the strategy
worked.  Johnston was forced to abandon the heights he had held so
well, in order to protect his rear.  He had lost a third of his men
in that fight and the remainder slogged tiredly through the rain
across the country toward the Chattahoochee River.  The
Confederates could expect no more reinforcements, whereas the
railroad, which the Yankees now held from Tennessee south to the
battle line, brought Sherman fresh troops and supplies daily.  So
the gray lines went back through the muddy fields, back toward
Atlanta.

With the loss of the supposedly unconquerable position, a fresh
wave of terror swept the town.  For twenty-five wild, happy days,
everyone had assured everyone else that this could not possibly
happen.  And now it had happened!  But surely the General would
hold the Yankees on the opposite bank of the river.  Though God
knows the river was close enough, only seven miles away!

But Sherman flanked them again, crossing the stream above them, and
the weary gray files were forced to hurry across the yellow water
and throw themselves again between the invaders and Atlanta.  They
dug in hastily in shallow pits to the north of the town in the
valley of Peachtree Creek.  Atlanta was in agony and panic.

Fight and fall back!  Fight and fall back!  And every retreat was
bringing the Yankees closer to the town.  Peachtree Creek was only
five miles away!  What was the General thinking about?

The cries of "Give us a man who will stand and fight!" penetrated
even to Richmond.  Richmond knew that if Atlanta was lost, the war
was lost, and after the army had crossed the Chattahoochee, General
Johnston was removed from command.  General Hood, one of his corps
commanders, took over the army, and the town breathed a little
easier.  Hood wouldn't retreat.  Not that tall Kentuckian, with his
flowing beard and flashing eye!  He had the reputation of a
bulldog.  He'd drive the Yankees back from the creek, yes, back
across the river and on up the road every step of the way back to
Dalton.  But the army cried:  "Give us back Old Joe!" for they had
been with Old Joe all the weary miles from Dalton and they knew, as
the civilians could not know, the odds that had opposed them.

Sherman did not wait for Hood to get himself in readiness to
attack.  On the day after the change in command, the Yankee general
struck swiftly at the little town of Decatur, six miles beyond
Atlanta, captured it and cut the railroad there.  This was the
railroad connecting Atlanta with Augusta, with Charleston, and
Wilmington and with Virginia.  Sherman had dealt the Confederacy a
crippling blow.  The time had come for action!  Atlanta screamed
for action!

Then, on a July afternoon of steaming heat, Atlanta had its wish.
General Hood did more than stand and fight.  He assaulted the
Yankees fiercely at Peachtree Creek, hurling his men from their
rifle pits against the blue lines where Sherman's men outnumbered
him more than two to one.

Frightened, praying that Hood's attack would drive the Yankees
back, everyone listened to the sound of booming cannon and the
crackling of thousands of rifles which, though five miles away from
the center of town, were so loud as to seem almost in the next
block.  They could hear the rumblings of the batteries, see the
smoke which rolled like low-hanging clouds above the trees, but for
hours no one knew how the battle was going.

By late afternoon the first news came, but it was uncertain,
contradictory, frightening, brought as it was by men wounded in the
early hours of the battle.  These men began straggling in, singly
and in groups, the less seriously wounded supporting those who
limped and staggered.  Soon a steady stream of them was
established, making their painful way into town toward the
hospitals, their faces black as negroes' from powder stains, dust
and sweat, their wounds unbandaged, blood drying, flies swarming
about them.

Aunt Pitty's was one of the first houses which the wounded reached
as they struggled in from the north of the town, and one after
another, they tottered to the gate, sank down on the green lawn and
croaked:

"Water!"

All that burning afternoon, Aunt Pitty and her family, black and
white, stood in the sun with buckets of water and bandages, ladling
drinks, binding wounds until the bandages gave out and even the
torn sheets and towels were exhausted.  Aunt Pitty completely
forgot that the sight of blood always made her faint and she worked
until her little feet in their too small shoes swelled and would no
longer support her.  Even Melanie, now great with child, forgot her
modesty and worked feverishly side by side with Prissy, Cookie and
Scarlett, her face as tense as any of the wounded.  When at last
she fainted, there was no place to lay her except on the kitchen
table, as every bed, chair and sofa in the house was filled with
wounded.

Forgotten in the tumult, little Wade crouched behind the banisters
on the front porch, peering out onto the lawn like a caged,
frightened rabbit, his eyes wide with terror, sucking his thumb and
hiccoughing.  Once Scarlett saw him and cried sharply:  "Go play in
the back yard, Wade Hampton!" but he was too terrified, too
fascinated by the mad scene before him to obey.

The lawn was covered with prostrate men, too tired to walk farther,
too weak from wounds to move.  These Uncle Peter loaded into the
carriage and drove to the hospital, making trip after trip until
the old horse was lathered.  Mrs. Meade and Mrs. Merriwether sent
their carriages and they, too, drove off, springs sagging beneath
the weight of the wounded.

Later, in the long, hot summer twilight, the ambulances came
rumbling down the road from the battle field and commissary wagons,
covered with muddy canvas.  Then farm wagons, ox carts and even
private carriages commandeered by the medical corps.  They passed
Aunt Pitty's house, jolting over the bumpy road, packed with
wounded and dying men, dripping blood into the red dust.  At the
sight of the women with buckets and dippers, the conveyances halted
and the chorus went up in cries, in whispers:

"Water!"

Scarlett held wobbling heads that parched lips might drink, poured
buckets of water over dusty, feverish bodies and into open wounds
that the men might enjoy a brief moment's relief.  She tiptoed to
hand dippers to ambulance drivers and of each she questioned, her
heart in her throat:  "What news?  What news?"

From all came back the answer:  "Don't know fer sartin, lady.  It's
too soon to tell."

Night came and it was sultry.  No air moved and the flaring pine
knots the negroes held made the air hotter.  Dust clogged
Scarlett's nostrils and dried her lips.  Her lavender calico dress,
so freshly clean and starched that morning, was streaked with
blood, dirt and sweat.  This, then, was what Ashley had meant when
he wrote that war was not glory but dirt and misery.

Fatigue gave an unreal, nightmarish cast to the whole scene.  It
couldn't be real--or it was real, then the world had gone mad.  If
not, why should she be standing here in Aunt Pitty's peaceful front
yard, amid wavering lights, pouring water over dying beaux?  For so
many of them were her beaux and they tried to smile when they saw
her.  There were so many men jolting down this dark, dusty road
whom she knew so well, so many men dying here before her eyes,
mosquitoes and gnats swarming their bloody faces, men with whom she
had danced and laughed, for whom she had played music and sung
songs, teased, comforted and loved--a little.

She found Carey Ashburn on the bottom layer of wounded in an ox
cart, barely alive from a bullet wound in his head.  But she could
not extricate him without disturbing six other wounded men, so she
let him go on to the hospital.  Later she heard he had died before
a doctor ever saw him and was buried somewhere, no one knew
exactly.  So many men had been buried that month, in shallow,
hastily dug graves at Oakland Cemetery.  Melanie felt it keenly
that they had not been able to get a lock of Carey's hair to send
to his mother in Alabama.

As the hot night wore on and their backs were aching and their
knees buckling from weariness, Scarlett and Pitty cried to man
after man:  "What news?  What news?"

And as the long hours dragged past, they had their answer, an
answer that made them look whitely into each other's eyes.

"We're falling back."  "We've got to fall back."  "They outnumber
us by thousands."  "The Yankees have got Wheeler's cavalry cut off
near Decatur.  We got to reenforce them."  "Our boys will all be in
town soon."

Scarlett and Pitty clutched each other's arms for support.

"Are--are the Yankees coming?"

"Yes'm, they're comin' all right but they ain't goin' ter git fer,
lady."  "Don't fret, Miss, they can't take Atlanta."  "No, Ma'm, we
got a million miles of breastworks 'round this town."  "I heard Old
Joe say it myself:  'I can hold Atlanta forever.'"  "But we ain't
got Old Joe.  We got--"  "Shut up, you fool!  Do you want to scare
the ladies?"  "The Yankees will never take this place, Ma'm."
"Whyn't you ladies go ter Macon or somewheres that's safer?  Ain't
you got no kinfolks there?"  "The Yankees ain't goin' ter take
Atlanta but still it ain't goin' ter be so healthy for ladies
whilst they're tryin' it."  "There's goin' ter be a powerful lot of
shellin'."

In a warm steaming rain the next day, the defeated army poured
though Atlanta by thousands, exhausted by hunger and weariness,
depleted by seventy-six days of battle and retreat, their horses
starved scarecrows, their cannon and caissons harnessed with odds
and ends of rope and strips of rawhide.  But they did not come in
as disorderly rabble, in full rout.  They marched in good order,
jaunty for all their rags, their torn red battle flags flying in
the rain.  They had learned retreating under Old Joe, who had made
it as great a feat of strategy as advancing.  The bearded, shabby
files swung down Peachtree Street to the tune of "Maryland!  My
Maryland!" and all the town turned out to cheer them.  In victory
or defeat, they were their boys.

The state militia who had gone out so short a time before,
resplendent in new uniforms, could hardly be distinguished from the
seasoned troops, so dirty and unkempt were they.  There was a new
look in their eyes.  Three years of apologizing, of explaining why
they were not at the front was behind them now.  They had traded
security behind the lines for the hardships of battle.  Many of
their number had traded easy living for hard death.  They were
veterans now, veterans of brief service, but veterans just the
same, and they had acquitted themselves well.  They searched out
the faces of friends in the crowd and stared at them proudly,
defiantly.  They could hold up their heads now.

The old men and boys of the Home Guard marched by, the graybeards
almost too weary to lift their feet, the boys wearing the faces of
tired children, confronted too early with adult problems.  Scarlett
caught sight of Phil Meade and hardly recognized him, so black was
his face with powder and grime, so taut with strain and weariness.
Uncle Henry went limping by, hatless in the rain, his head stuck
through a hole in a piece of old oilcloth.  Grandpa Merriwether
rode in on a gun carriage, his bare feet tied in quilt scraps.  But
search though she might, she saw no sign of John Wilkes.

Johnston's veterans, however, went by with the tireless, careless
step which had carried them for three years, and they still had the
energy to grin and wave at pretty girls and to call rude gibes to
men not in uniform.  They were on their way to the entrenchments
that ringed the town--no shallow, hastily dug trenches, these, but
earthworks, breast high, reinforced with sandbags and tipped with
sharpened staves of wood.  For mile after mile the trenches
encircled the town, red gashes surmounted by red mounds, waiting
for the men who would fill them.

The crowd cheered the troops as they would have cheered them in
victory.  There was fear in every heart but, now that they knew the
truth, now that the worst had happened, now that the war was in
their front yard, a change came over the town.  There was no panic
now, no hysteria.  Whatever lay in hearts did not show on faces.
Everyone looked cheerful even if the cheer was strained.  Everyone
tried to show brave, confident faces to the troops.  Everyone
repeated what Old Joe had said, just before he was relieved of
command:  "I can hold Atlanta forever."

Now that Hood had had to retreat, quite a number wished, with the
soldiers, that they had Old Joe back, but they forebore saying it
and took courage from Old Joe's remark:

"I can hold Atlanta forever!"



Not for Hood the cautious tactics of General Johnston.  He
assaulted the Yankees on the east, he assaulted them on the west.
Sherman was circling the town like a wrestler seeking a fresh hold
on an opponent's body, and Hood did not remain behind his rifle
pits waiting for the Yankees to attack.  He went out boldly to meet
them and savagely fell upon them.  Within the space of a few days
the battles of Atlanta and of Ezra Church were fought, and both of
them were major engagements which made Peachtree Creek seem like a
skirmish.

But the Yankees kept coming back for more.  They had suffered heavy
losses but they could afford to lose.  And all the while their
batteries poured shells into Atlanta, killing people in their
homes, ripping roofs off buildings, tearing huge craters in the
streets.  The townsfolk sheltered as best they could in cellars, in
holes in the ground and in shallow tunnels dug in railroad cuts.
Atlanta was under siege.

Within eleven days after he had taken command, General Hood had
lost almost as many men as Johnston had lost in seventy-four days
of battle and retreat, and Atlanta was hemmed in on three sides.

The railroad from Atlanta to Tennessee was now in Sherman's hands
for its full length.  His army was across the railroad to the east
and he had cut the railroad running southwest to Alabama.  Only the
one railroad to the south, to Macon and Savannah, was still open.
The town was crowded with soldiers, swamped with wounded, jammed
with refugees, and this one line was inadequate for the crying
needs of the stricken city.  But as long as this railroad could be
held, Atlanta could still stand.

Scarlett was terrified when she realized how important this line
had become, how fiercely Sherman would fight to take it, how
desperately Hood would fight to defend it.  For this was the
railroad which ran through the County, through Jonesboro.  And Tara
was only five miles from Jonesboro!  Tara seemed like a haven of
refuge by comparison with the screaming hell of Atlanta, but Tara
was only five miles from Jonesboro!



Scarlett and many other ladies sat on the flat roofs of stores,
shaded by their tiny parasols, and watched the fighting on the day
of the battle of Atlanta.  But when shells began falling in the
streets for the first time, they fled to the cellars, and that
night the exodus of women, children and old people from the city
began.  Macon was their destination and many of those who took the
train that night had already refugeed five and six times before, as
Johnston fell back from Dalton.  They were traveling lighter now
than when they arrived in Atlanta.  Most of them carried only a
carpetbag and a scanty lunch done up in a bandana handkerchief.
Here and there, frightened servants carried silver pitchers, knives
and forks and a family portrait or two which had been salvaged in
the first fight.

Mrs. Merriwether and Mrs. Elsing refused to leave.  They were
needed at the hospital and furthermore, they said proudly, they
weren't afraid and no Yankees were going to run them out of their
homes.  But Maybelle and her baby and Fanny Elsing went to Macon.
Mrs. Meade was disobedient for the first time in her married life
and flatly refused to yield to the doctor's command that she take
the train to safety.  The doctor needed her, she said.  Moreover,
Phil was somewhere in the trenches and she wanted to be near by in
case . . .

But Mrs. Whiting went and many other ladies of Scarlett's circle.
Aunt Pitty, who had been the first to denounce Old Joe for his
policy of retreat, was among the first to pack her trunks.  Her
nerves, she said, were delicate and she could not endure noises.
She feared she might faint at an explosion and not be able to reach
the cellar.  No, she was not afraid.  Her baby mouth tried to set
in martial lines but failed.  She'd go to Macon and stay with her
cousin, old Mrs. Burr, and the girls should come with her.

Scarlett did not want to go to Macon.  Frightened as she was of the
shells, she'd rather stay in Atlanta than go to Macon, for she
hated old Mrs. Burr cordially.  Years ago, Mrs. Burr had said she
was "fast" after catching her kissing her son Willie at one of the
Wilkes' house parties.  No, she told Aunt Pitty, I'll go home to
Tara and Melly can go to Macon with you.

At this Melanie began to cry in a frightened, heartbroken way.
When Aunt Pitty fled to get Dr. Meade, Melanie caught Scarlett's
hand in hers, pleading:

"Dear, don't go to Tara and leave me!  I'll be so lonely without
you.  Oh, Scarlett, I'd just die if you weren't with me when the
baby came!  Yes--Yes, I know I've got Aunt Pitty and she is sweet.
But after all, she's never had a baby, and sometimes she makes me
so nervous I could scream.  Don't desert me, darling.  You've been
just like a sister to me, and besides," she smiled wanly, "you
promised Ashley you'd take care of me.  He told me he was going to
ask you."

Scarlett stared down at her in wonderment.  With her own dislike of
this woman so strong she could barely conceal it, how could Melly
love her so?  How could Melly be so stupid as not to guess the
secret of her love of Ashley?  She had given herself away a hundred
times during these months of torment, waiting for news of him.  But
Melanie saw nothing, Melanie who could see nothing but good in
anyone she loved. . . .  Yes, she had promised Ashley she would
look out for Melanie.  Oh, Ashley! Ashley! you must be dead, dead
these many months!  And now your promise reaches out and clutches
me!

"Well," she said shortly, "I did promise him that and I don't go
back on my promises.  But I won't go to Macon and stay with that
old Burr cat.  I'd claw her eyes out in five minutes.  I'm going
home to Tara and you can come with me.  Mother would love to have
you."

"Oh, I'd like that!  Your mother is so sweet.  But you know Auntie
would just die if she wasn't with me when the baby came, and I know
she won't go to Tara.  It's too close to the fighting, and Auntie
wants to be safe."

Dr. Meade, who had arrived out of breath, expecting to find Melanie
in premature labor at least, judging by Aunt Pitty's alarmed
summoning, was indignant and said as much.  And upon learning the
cause of the upset, he settled the matter with words that left no
room for argument.

"It's out of the question for you to go to Macon, Miss Melly.  I
won't answer for you if you move.  The trains are crowded and
uncertain and the passengers are liable to be put off in the woods
at any time, if the trains are needed for the wounded or troops and
supplies.  In your condition--"

"But if I went to Tara with Scarlett--"

"I tell you I won't have you moved.  The train to Tara is the train
to Macon and the same conditions prevail.  Moreover, no one knows
just where the Yankees are now, but they are all over everywhere.
Your train might even be captured.  And even if you reached
Jonesboro safely, there'd be a five-mile ride over a rough road
before you ever reached Tara.  It's no trip for a woman in a
delicate condition.  Besides, there's not a doctor in the County
since old Dr. Fontaine joined the army."

"But there are midwives--"

"I said a doctor," he answered brusquely and his eyes unconsciously
went over her tiny frame.  "I won't have you moved.  It might be
dangerous.  You don't want to have the baby on the train or in a
buggy, do you?"

This medical frankness reduced the ladies to embarrassed blushes
and silence.

"You've got to stay right here where I can watch you, and you must
stay in bed.  No running up and down stairs to cellars.  No, not
even if shells come right in the window.  After all, there's not
so much danger here.  We'll have the Yankees beaten back in no
time. . . .  Now, Miss Pitty, you go right on to Macon and leave
the young ladies here."

"Unchaperoned?" she cried, aghast.

"They are matrons," said the doctor testily.  "And Mrs. Meade is
just two houses away.  They won't be receiving any male company
anyway with Miss Melly in her condition.  Good Heavens, Miss Pitty!
This is war time.  We can't think of the proprieties now.  We must
think of Miss Melly."

He stamped out of the room and waited on the front porch until
Scarlett joined him.

"I shall talk frankly to you, Miss Scarlett," he began, jerking at
his gray beard.  "You seem to be a young woman of common sense, so
spare me your blushes.  I do not want to hear any further talk
about Miss Melly being moved.  I doubt if she could stand the trip.
She is going to have a difficult time, even in the best of
circumstances--very narrow in the hips, as you know, and probably
will need forceps for her delivery, so I don't want any ignorant
darky midwife meddling with her.  Women like her should never have
children, but--  Anyway, you pack Miss Pitty's trunk and send her
to Macon.  She's so scared she'll upset Miss Melly and that won't
do any good.  And now, Miss," he fixed her with a piercing glance,
"I don't want to hear about you going home, either.  You stay with
Miss Melly till the baby comes.  Not afraid, are you?"

"Oh, no!" lied Scarlett, stoutly.

"That's a brave girl.  Mrs. Meade will give you whatever
chaperonage you need and I'll send over old Betsy to cook for you,
if Miss Pitty wants to take her servants with her.  It won't be for
long.  The baby ought to be here in another five weeks, but you
never can tell with first babies and all this shelling going on.
It may come any day."

So Aunt Pittypat went to Macon, in floods of tears, taking Uncle
Peter and Cookie with her.  The carriage and horse she donated to
the hospital in a burst of patriotism which she immediately
regretted and that brought on more tears.  And Scarlett and Melanie
were left alone with Wade and Prissy in a house that was much
quieter, even though the cannonading continued.



CHAPTER XIX


In those first days of the siege, when the Yankees crashed here and
there against the defenses of the city, Scarlett was so frightened
by the bursting shells she could only cower helplessly, her hands
over her ears, expecting every moment to be blown into eternity.
When she heard the whistling screams that heralded their approach,
she rushed to Melanie's room and flung herself on the bed beside
her, and the two clutched each other, screaming "Oh! Oh!" as they
buried their heads in the pillows.  Prissy and Wade scurried for
the cellar and crouched in the cobwebbed darkness, Prissy squalling
at the top of her voice and Wade sobbing and hiccoughing.

Suffocating under feather pillows while death screamed overhead,
Scarlett silently cursed Melanie for keeping her from the safer
regions below stairs.  But the doctor had forbidden Melanie to walk
and Scarlett had to stay with her.  Added to her terror of being
blown to pieces was her equally active terror that Melanie's baby
might arrive at any moment.  Sweat broke out on Scarlett with
clammy dampness, whenever this thought entered her mind.  What
would she do if the baby started coming?  She knew she'd rather let
Melanie die than go out on the streets to hunt for the doctor when
the shells were falling like April rain.  And she knew Prissy could
be beaten to death before she would venture forth.  What would she
do if the baby came?

These matters she discussed with Prissy in whispers one evening, as
they prepared Melanie's supper tray, and Prissy, surprisingly
enough, calmed her fears.

"Miss Scarlett, effen we kain git de doctah w'en Miss Melly's time
come, doan you bodder.  Ah kin manage.  Ah knows all 'bout
birthin'.  Ain' mah ma a midwife?  Ain' she raise me ter be a
midwife, too?  Jes' you leave it ter me."

Scarlett breathed more easily knowing that experienced hands were
near, but she nevertheless yearned to have the ordeal over and done
with.  Mad to be away from exploding shells, desperate to get home
to the quiet of Tara, she prayed every night that the baby would
arrive the next day, so she would be released from her promise and
could leave Atlanta.  Tara seemed so safe, so far away from all
this misery.

Scarlett longed for home and her mother as she had never longed for
anything in all her life.  If she were just near Ellen she wouldn't
be afraid, no matter what happened.  Every night after a day of
screeching ear-splitting shells, she went to bed determined to tell
Melanie the next morning that she could not stand Atlanta another
day, that she would have to go home and Melanie would have to go to
Mrs. Meade's.  But, as she lay on her pillow, there always rose the
memory of Ashley's face as it had looked when she last saw him,
drawn as with an inner pain but with a little smile on his lips:
"You'll take care of Melanie, won't you?  You're so strong. . . .
Promise me."  And she had promised.  Somewhere, Ashley lay dead.
Wherever he was, he was watching her, holding her to that promise.
Living or dead, she could not fail him, no matter what the cost.
So she remained day after day.

In response to Ellen's letters, pleading with her to come home, she
wrote minimizing the dangers of the siege, explaining Melanie's
predicament and promising to come as soon as the baby was born.
Ellen, sensitive to the bonds of kin, be they blood or marriage,
wrote back reluctantly agreeing that she must stay but demanding
Wade and Prissy be sent home immediately.  This suggestion met with
the complete approval of Prissy, who was now reduced to teeth-
chattering idiocy at every unexpected sound.  She spent so much
time crouching in the cellar that the girls would have fared badly
but for Mrs. Meade's stolid old Betsy.

Scarlett was as anxious as her mother to have Wade out of Atlanta,
not only for the child's safety, but because his constant fear
irritated her.  Wade was terrified to speechlessness by the
shelling, and even when lulls came he clung to Scarlett's skirts,
too terrified to cry.  He was afraid to go to bed at night, afraid
of the dark, afraid to sleep lest the Yankees should come and get
him, and the sound of his soft nervous whimpering in the night
grated unendurably on her nerves.  Secretly she was just as
frightened as he was, but it angered her to be reminded of it every
minute by his tense, drawn face.  Yes, Tara was the place for Wade.
Prissy should take him there and return immediately to be present
when the baby came.

But before Scarlett could start the two on their homeward journey,
news came that the Yankees had swung to the south and were
skirmishing along the railroad between Atlanta and Jonesboro.
Suppose the Yankees should capture the train on which Wade and
Prissy were riding--Scarlett and Melanie turned pale at the
thought, for everyone knew that Yankee atrocities on helpless
children were even more dreadful than on women.  So she feared to
send him home and he remained in Atlanta, a frightened, silent
little ghost, pattering about desperately after his mother, fearing
to have her skirt out of his hand for even a minute.

The siege went on through the hot days of July, thundering days
following nights of sullen, ominous stillness, and the town began
to adjust itself.  It was as though, the worst having happened,
they had nothing more to fear.  They had feared a siege and now
they had a siege and, after all, it wasn't so bad.  Life could and
did go on almost as usual.  They knew they were sitting on a
volcano, but until that volcano erupted there was nothing they
could do.  So why worry now?  And probably it wouldn't erupt
anyway.  Just look how General Hood is holding the Yankees out of
the city!  And see how the cavalry is holding the railroad to
Macon!  Sherman will never take it!

But for all their apparent insouciance in the face of falling
shells and shorter rations, for all their ignoring the Yankees,
barely half a mile away, and for all their boundless confidence in
the ragged line of gray men in the rifle pits, there pulsed, just
below the skin of Atlanta, a wild uncertainty over what the next
day would bring.  Suspense, worry, sorrow, hunger and the torment
of rising, falling, rising hope was wearing that skin thin.

Gradually, Scarlett drew courage from the brave faces of her
friends and from the merciful adjustment which nature makes when
what cannot be cured must be endured.  To be sure, she still jumped
at the sound of explosions but she did not run screaming to burrow
her head under Melanie's pillow.  She could now gulp and say
weakly:  "That was close, wasn't it?"

She was less frightened also because life had taken on the quality
of a dream, a dream too terrible to be real.  It wasn't possible
that she, Scarlett O'Hara, should be in such a predicament, with
the danger of death about her every hour, every minute.  It wasn't
possible that the quiet tenor of life could have changed so
completely in so short a time.

It was unreal, grotesquely unreal, that morning skies which dawned
so tenderly blue could be profaned with cannon smoke that hung over
the town like low thunder clouds, that warm noontides filled with
the piercing sweetness of massed honeysuckle and climbing roses
could be so fearful, as shells screamed into the streets, bursting
like the crack of doom, throwing iron splinters hundreds of yards,
blowing people and animals to bits.

Quiet, drowsy afternoon siestas had ceased to be, for though the
clamor of battle might lull from time to time, Peachtree Street was
alive and noisy at all hours, cannon and ambulances rumbling by,
wounded stumbling in from the rifle pits, regiments hurrying past
at double-quick, ordered from the ditches on one side of town to
the defense of some hard-pressed earthworks on the other, and
couriers dashing headlong down the street toward headquarters as
though the fate of the Confederacy hung on them.

The hot nights brought a measure of quiet but it was a sinister
quiet.  When the night was still, it was too still--as though the
tree frogs, katydids and sleepy mockingbirds were too frightened to
raise their voices in the usual summer-night chorus.  Now and
again, the quiet was broken sharply by the crack-cracking of musket
fire in the last line of defenses.

Often in the late night hours, when the lamps were out and Melanie
asleep and deathly silence pressed over the town, Scarlett, lying
awake, heard the latch of the front gate click and soft urgent
tappings on the front door.

Always, faceless soldiers stood on the dark porch and from the
darkness many different voices spoke to her.  Sometimes a cultured
voice came from the shadows:  "Madam, my abject apologies for
disturbing you, but could I have water for myself and my horse?"
Sometimes it was the hard burring of a mountain voice, sometimes
the odd nasals of the flat Wiregrass country to the far south,
occasionally the lulling drawl of the Coast that caught at her
heart, reminding her of Ellen's voice.

"Missy, I got a pardner here who I wuz aimin' ter git ter the
horsepittle but looks like he ain't goin' ter last that fer.  Kin
you take him in?"

"Lady, I shore could do with some vittles.  I'd shore relish a corn
pone if it didn't deprive you none."

"Madam, forgive my intrusion but--could I spend the night on your
porch?  I saw the roses and smelled the honeysuckle and it was so
much like home that I was emboldened--"

No, these nights were not real!  They were a nightmare and the men
were part of that nightmare, men without bodies or faces, only
tired voices speaking to her from the warm dark.  Draw water, serve
food, lay pillows on the front porch, bind wounds, hold the dirty
heads of the dying.  No, this could not be happening to her!

Once, late in July, it was Uncle Henry Hamilton who came tapping in
the night.  Uncle Henry was minus his umbrella and carpetbag now,
and his fat stomach as well.  The skin of his pink fat face hung
down in loose folds like the dewlaps of a bulldog and his long
white hair was indescribably dirty.  He was almost barefoot,
crawling with lice, and he was hungry, but his irascible spirit was
unimpaired.

Despite his remark:  "It's a foolish war when old fools like me are
out toting guns," the girls received the impression that Uncle
Henry was enjoying himself.  He was needed, like the young men, and
he was doing a young man's work.  Moreover, he could keep up with
the young men, which was more than Grandpa Merriwether could do, he
told them gleefully.  Grandpa's lumbago was troubling him greatly
and the Captain wanted to discharge him.  But Grandpa wouldn't go
home.  He said frankly that he preferred the Captain's swearing and
bullying to his daughter-in-law's coddling, and her incessant
demands that he give up chewing tobacco and launder his beard every
day.

Uncle Henry's visit was brief, for he had only a four-hour furlough
and he needed half of it for the long walk in from the breastworks
and back.

"Girls, I'm not going to see you all for a while," he announced as
he sat in Melanie's bedroom, luxuriously wriggling his blistered
feet in the tub of cold water Scarlett had set before him.  "Our
company is going out in the morning."

"Where?" questioned Melanie frightened, clutching his arm.

"Don't put your hand on me," said Uncle Henry irritably.  "I'm
crawling with lice.  War would be a picnic if it wasn't for lice
and dysentery.  Where'm I going?  Well, I haven't been told but
I've got a good idea.  We're marching south, toward Jonesboro, in
the morning, unless I'm greatly in error."

"Oh, why toward Jonesboro?"

"Because there's going to be big fighting there, Missy.  The
Yankees are going to take the railroad if they possibly can.  And
if they do take it, it's good-by Atlanta!"

"Oh, Uncle Henry, do you think they will?"

"Shucks, girls!  No!  How can they when I'm there?"  Uncle Henry
grinned at their frightened faces and then, becoming serious again:
"It's going to be a hard fight, girls.  We've got to win it.  You
know, of course, that the Yankees have got all the railroads except
the one to Macon, but that isn't all they've got.  Maybe you girls
didn't know it, but they've got every road, too, every wagon lane
and bridle path, except the McDonough road.  Atlanta's in a bag and
the strings of the bag are at Jonesboro.  And if the Yankees can
take the railroad there, they can pull up the strings and have us,
just like a possum in a poke.  So, we don't aim to let them get
that railroad. . . .  I may be gone a while, girls.  I just came in
to tell you all good-by and to make sure Scarlett was still with
you, Melly."

"Of course, she's with me," said Melanie fondly.  "Don't you worry
about us, Uncle Henry, and do take care of yourself."

Uncle Henry wiped his wet feet on the rag rug and groaned as he
drew on his tattered shoes.

"I got to be going," he said.  "I've got five miles to walk.
Scarlett, you fix me up some kind of lunch to take.  Anything
you've got."

After he had kissed Melanie good-by, he went down to the kitchen
where Scarlett was wrapping a corn pone and some apples in a
napkin.

"Uncle Henry--is it--is it really so serious?"

"Serious?  God'lmighty, yes!  Don't be a goose.  We're in the last
ditch."

"Do you think they'll get to Tara?"

"Why--" began Uncle Henry, irritated at the feminine mind which
thought only of personal things when broad issues were involved.
Then, seeing her frightened, woebegone face, he softened.

"Of course they won't.  Tara's five miles from the railroad and
it's the railroad the Yankees want.  You've got no more sense than
a June bug, Missy."  He broke off abruptly.  "I didn't walk all
this way here tonight just to tell you all good-by.  I came to
bring Melly some bad news, but when I got up to it I just couldn't
tell her.  So I'm going to leave it to you to do."

"Ashley isn't--you haven't heard anything--that he's--dead?"

"Now, how would I be hearing about Ashley when I've been standing
in rifle pits up to the seat of my pants in mud?" the old gentleman
asked testily.  "No.  It's about his father.  John Wilkes is dead."

Scarlett sat down suddenly, the half-wrapped lunch in her hand.

"I came to tell Melly--but I couldn't.  You must do it.  And give
her these."

He hauled from his pockets a heavy gold watch with dangling seals,
a small miniature of the long dead Mrs. Wilkes and a pair of
massive cuff buttons.  At the sight of the watch which she had seen
in John Wilkes' hands a thousand times, the full realization came
over Scarlett that Ashley's father was really dead.  And she was
too stunned to cry or to speak.  Uncle Henry fidgeted, coughed and
did not look at her, lest he catch sight of a tear that would upset
him.

"He was a brave man, Scarlett.  Tell Melly that.  Tell her to write
it to his girls.  And a good soldier for all his years.  A shell
got him.  Came right down on him and his horse.  Tore the horse's--
I shot the horse myself, poor creature.  A fine little mare she
was.  You'd better write Mrs. Tarleton about that, too.  She set a
store on that mare.  Wrap up my lunch, child.  I must be going.
There, dear, don't take it so hard.  What better way can an old man
die than doing a young man's work?"

"Oh, he shouldn't have died!  He shouldn't have ever gone to the
war.  He should have lived and seen his grandchild grow up and died
peacefully in bed.  Oh, why did he go?  He didn't believe in
secession and he hated the war and--"

"Plenty of us think that way, but what of it?"  Uncle Henry blew
his nose grumpily.  "Do you think I enjoy letting Yankee riflemen
use me for a target at my age?  But there's no other choice for a
gentleman these days.  Kiss me good-by, child, and don't worry
about me.  I'll come through this war safely."

Scarlett kissed him and heard him go down the steps into the dark,
heard the latch click on the front gate.  She stood for a minute
looking at the keepsakes in her hand.  And then she went up the
stairs to tell Melanie.



At the end of July came the unwelcome news, predicted by Uncle
Henry, that the Yankees had swung around again toward Jonesboro.
They had cut the railroad four miles below the town, but they had
been beaten off by the Confederate cavalry; and the engineering
corps, sweating in the broiling sun, had repaired the line.

Scarlett was frantic with anxiety.  For three days she waited, fear
growing in her heart.  Then a reassuring letter came from Gerald.
The enemy had not reached Tara.  They had heard the sound of the
fight but they had seen no Yankees.

Gerald's letter was so full of brag and bluster as to how the
Yankees had been driven from the railroad that one would have
thought he personally had accomplished the feat, single handed.
He wrote for three pages about the gallantry of the troops and then,
at the end of his letter, mentioned briefly that Carreen was ill.
The typhoid, Mrs. O'Hara said it was.  She was not very ill and
Scarlett was not to worry about her, but on no condition must she
come home now, even if the railroad should become safe.  Mrs. O'Hara
was very glad now that Scarlett and Wade had not come home when the
siege began.  Mrs. O'Hara said Scarlett must go to church and say
some Rosaries for Carreen's recovery.

Scarlett's conscience smote her at this last, for it had been
months since she had been to church.  Once she would have thought
this omission a mortal sin but, somehow, staying away from church
did not seem so sinful now as it formerly had.  But she obeyed her
mother and going to her room gabbled a hasty Rosary.  When she rose
from her knees she did not feel as comforted as she had formerly
felt after prayer.  For some time she had felt that God was not
watching out for her, the Confederates or the South, in spite of
the millions of prayers ascending to Him daily.

That night she sat on the front porch with Gerald's letter in her
bosom where she could touch it occasionally and bring Tara and
Ellen closer to her.  The lamp in the parlor window threw odd
golden shadows onto the dark vine-shrouded porch, and the matted
tangle of yellow climbing roses and honeysuckle made a wall of
mingled fragrance about her.  The night was utterly still.  Not
even the crack of a rifle had sounded since sunset and the world
seemed far away.  Scarlett rocked back and forth, lonely, miserable
since reading the news from Tara, wishing that someone, anyone,
even Mrs. Merriwether, were with her.  But Mrs. Merriwether was on
night duty at the hospital, Mrs. Meade was at home making a feast
for Phil, who was in from the front lines, and Melanie was asleep.
There was not even the hope of a chance caller.  Visitors had
fallen off to nothing this last week, for every man who could walk
was in the rifle pits or chasing the Yankees about the countryside
near Jonesboro.

It was not often that she was alone like this and she did not like
it.  When she was alone she had to think and, these days, thoughts
were not so pleasant.  Like everyone else, she had fallen into the
habit of thinking of the past, the dead.

Tonight when Atlanta was so quiet, she could close her eyes and
imagine she was back in the rural stillness of Tara and that life
was unchanged, unchanging.  But she knew that life in the County
would never be the same again.  She thought of the four Tarletons,
the red-haired twins and Tom and Boyd, and a passionate sadness
caught at her throat.  Why, either Stu or Brent might have been her
husband.  But now, when the war was over and she went back to Tara
to live, she would never again hear their wild halloos as they
dashed up the avenue of cedars.  And Raiford Calvert, who danced so
divinely, would never again choose her to be his partner.  And the
Munroe boys and little Joe Fontaine and--

"Oh, Ashley!" she sobbed, dropping her head into her hands.  "I'll
never get used to you being gone!"

She heard the front gate click and she hastily raised her head and
dashed her hand across her wet eyes.  She rose and saw it was Rhett
Butler coming up the walk, carrying his wide Panama hat in his
hand.  She had not seen him since the day when she had alighted
from his carriage so precipitously at Five Points.  On that
occasion, she had expressed the desire never to lay eyes on him
again.  But she was so glad now to have someone to talk to, someone
to divert her thoughts from Ashley, that she hastily put the memory
from her mind.  Evidently he had forgotten the contretemps, or
pretended to have forgotten it, for he settled himself on the top
step at her feet without mention of their late difference.

"So you didn't refugee to Macon!  I heard that Miss Pitty had
retreated and, of course, I thought you had gone too.  So, when I
saw your light I came here to investigate.  Why did you stay?"

"To keep Melanie company.  You see, she--well, she can't refugee
just now."

"Thunderation," he said, and in the lamplight she saw that he was
frowning.  "You don't mean to tell me Mrs. Wilkes is still here?  I
never heard of such idiocy.  It's quite dangerous for her in her
condition."

Scarlett was silent, embarrassed, for Melanie's condition was not a
subject she could discuss with a man.  She was embarrassed, too,
that Rhett should know it was dangerous for Melanie.  Such
knowledge sat ill upon a bachelor.

"It's quite ungallant of you not to think that I might get hurt
too," she said tartly.

His eyes flickered with amusement.

"I'd back you against the Yankees any day."

"I'm not sure that that's a compliment," she said uncertainly.

"It isn't," he answered.  "When will you stop looking for
compliments in men's lightest utterances?"

"When I'm on my deathbed," she replied and smiled, thinking that
there would always be men to compliment her, even if Rhett never
did.

"Vanity, vanity," he said.  "At least, you are frank about it."

He opened his cigar case, extracted a black cigar and held it to
his nose for a moment.  A match flared, he leaned back against a
post and, clasping his hands about his knees, smoked a while in
silence.  Scarlett resumed her rocking and the still darkness of
the warm night closed about them.  The mockingbird, which nested in
the tangle of roses and honeysuckle, roused from slumber and gave
one timid, liquid note.  Then, as if thinking better of the matter,
it was silent again.

From the shadow of the porch, Rhett suddenly laughed, a low, soft
laugh.

"So you stayed with Mrs. Wilkes!  This is the strangest situation I
ever encountered!"

"I see nothing strange about it," she answered uncomfortably,
immediately on the alert.

"No?  But then you lack the impersonal viewpoint.  My impression
has been for some time past that you could hardly endure Mrs.
Wilkes.  You think her silly and stupid and her patriotic notions
bore you.  You seldom pass by the opportunity to slip in some
belittling remark about her, so naturally it seems strange to me
that you should elect to do the unselfish thing and stay here with
her during this shelling.  Now, just why did you do it?"

"Because she's Charlie's sister--and like a sister to me," answered
Scarlett with as much dignity as possible though her cheeks were
growing hot.

"You mean because she's Ashley's Wilkes' widow."

Scarlett rose quickly, struggling with her anger.

"I was almost on the point of forgiving you for your former boorish
conduct but now I shan't do it.  I wouldn't have ever let you come
upon this porch at all, if I hadn't been feeling so blue and--"

"Sit down and smooth your ruffled fur," he said, and his voice
changed.  He reached up and taking her hand pulled her back into
her chair.  "Why are you blue?"

"Oh, I had a letter from Tara today.  The Yankees are close to home
and my little sister is ill with typhoid and--and--so now, even if
I could go home, like I want to, Mother wouldn't let me for fear
I'd catch it too.  Oh, dear, and I do so want to go home!"

"Well, don't cry about it," he said, but his voice was kinder.
"You are much safer here in Atlanta even if the Yankees do come
than you'd be at Tara.  The Yankees won't hurt you and typhoid
would."

"The Yankees wouldn't hurt me!  How can you say such a lie?"

"My dear girl, the Yankees aren't fiends.  They haven't horns and
hoofs, as you seem to think.  They are pretty much like
Southerners--except with worse manners, of course, and terrible
accents."

"Why, the Yankees would--"

"Rape you?  I think not.  Though, of course, they'd want to."

"If you are going to talk vilely I shall go into the house," she
cried, grateful that the shadows hid her crimson face.

"Be frank.  Wasn't that what you were thinking?"

"Oh, certainly not!"

"Oh, but it was!  No use getting mad at me for reading your
thoughts.  That's what all our delicately nurtured and pure-minded
Southern ladies think.  They have it on their minds constantly.
I'll wager even dowagers like Mrs. Merriwether . . ."

Scarlett gulped in silence, remembering that wherever two or more
matrons were gathered together, in these trying days, they
whispered of such happenings, always in Virginia or Tennessee or
Lousiana, never close to home.  The Yankees raped women and ran
bayonets through children's stomachs and burned houses over the
heads of old people.  Everyone knew these things were true even if
they didn't shout them on the street corners.  And if Rhett had any
decency he would realize they were true.  And not talk about them.
And it wasn't any laughing matter either.

She could hear him chuckling softly.  Sometimes he was odious.  In
fact, most of the time he was odious.  It was awful for a man to
know what women really thought about and talked about.  It made a
girl feel positively undressed.  And no man ever learned such
things from good women either.  She was indignant that he had read
her mind.  She liked to believe herself a thing of mystery to men,
but she knew Rhett thought her as transparent as glass.

"Speaking of such matters," he continued, "have you a protector or
chaperon in the house?  The admirable Mrs. Merriwether or Mrs.
Meade?  They always look at me as if they knew I was here for no
good purpose."

"Mrs. Meade usually comes over at night," answered Scarlett, glad
to change the subject.  "But she couldn't tonight.  Phil, her boy,
is home."

"What luck," he said softly, "to find you alone."

Something in his voice made her heart beat pleasantly faster and
she felt her face flush.  She had heard that note in men's voices
often enough to know that it presaged a declaration of love.  Oh,
what fun!  If he would just say he loved her, how she would torment
him and get even with him for all the sarcastic remarks he had
flung at her these past three years.  She would lead him a chase
that would make up for even that awful humiliation of the day he
witnessed her slapping Ashley.  And then she'd tell him sweetly she
could only be a sister to him and retire with the full honors of
war.  She laughed nervously in pleasant anticipation.

"Don't giggle," he said, and taking her hand, he turned it over and
pressed his lips into the palm.  Something vital, electric, leaped
from him to her at the touch of his warm mouth, something that
caressed her whole body thrillingly.  His lips traveled to her
wrist and she knew he must feel the leap of her pulse as her heart
quickened and she tried to draw back her hand.  She had not
bargained on this--this treacherous warm tide of feeling that made
her want to run her hands through his hair, to feel his lips upon
her mouth.

She wasn't in love with him, she told herself confusedly.  She was
in love with Ashley.  But how to explain this feeling that made her
hands shake and the pit of her stomach grow cold?

He laughed softly.

"Don't pull away!  I won't hurt you!"

"Hurt me?  I'm not afraid of you, Rhett Butler, or of any man in
shoe leather!" she cried, furious that her voice shook as well as
her hands.

"An admirable sentiment, but do lower your voice.  Mrs. Wilkes
might hear you.  And pray compose yourself."  He sounded as though
delighted at her flurry.

"Scarlett, you do like me, don't you?"

That was more like what she was expecting.

"Well, sometimes," she answered cautiously.  "When you aren't
acting like a varmint."

He laughed again and held the palm of her hand against his hard
cheek.

"I think you like me because I am a varmint.  You've known so few
dyed-in-the-wool varmints in your sheltered life that my very
difference holds a quaint charm for you."

This was not the turn she had anticipated and she tried again
without success to pull her hand free.

"That's not true!  I like nice men--men you can depend on to always
be gentlemanly."

"You mean men you can always bully.  It's merely a matter of
definition.  But no matter."

He kissed her palm again, and again the skin on the back of her
neck crawled excitingly.

"But you do like me.  Could you ever love me, Scarlett?"

"Ah!" she thought, triumphantly.  "Now I've got him!"  And she
answered with studied coolness:  "Indeed, no.  That is--not unless
you mended your manners considerably."

"And I have no intention of mending them.  So you could not love
me?  That is as I hoped.  For while I like you immensely, I do not
love you and it would be tragic indeed for you to suffer twice from
unrequited love, wouldn't it, dear?  May I call you 'dear,' Mrs.
Hamilton?  I shall call you 'dear' whether you like it or not, so
no matter, but the proprieties must be observed."

"You don't love me?"

"No, indeed.  Did you hope that I did?"

"Don't be so presumptuous!"

"You hoped!  Alas, to blight your hopes!  I should love you, for
you are charming and talented at many useless accomplishments.  But
many ladies have charm and accomplishments and are just as useless
as you are.  No, I don't love you.  But I do like you tremendously--
for the elasticity of your conscience, for the selfishness which
you seldom trouble to hide, and for the shrewd practicality in you
which, I fear, you get from some not too remote Irish-peasant
ancestor."

Peasant!  Why, he was insulting her!  She began to splutter
wordlessly.

"Don't interrupt," he begged, squeezing her hand.  "I like you
because I have those same qualities in me and like begets liking.
I realize you still cherish the memory of the godlike and wooden-
headed Mr. Wilkes, who's probably been in his grave these six
months.  But there must be room in your heart for me too.
Scarlett, do stop wriggling!  I am making you a declaration.  I
have wanted you since the first time I laid eyes on you, in the
hall of Twelve Oaks, when you were bewitching poor Charlie
Hamilton.  I want you more than I have ever wanted any woman--and
I've waited longer for you than I've ever waited for any woman."

She was breathless with surprise at his last words.  In spite of
all his insults, he did love her and he was just so contrary he
didn't want to come out frankly and put it into words, for fear
she'd laugh.  Well, she'd show him and right quickly.

"Are you asking me to marry you?"

He dropped her hand and laughed so loudly she shrank back in her
chair.

"Good Lord, no!  Didn't I tell you I wasn't a marrying man?"

"But--but--what--"

He rose to his feet and, hand on heart, made her a burlesque bow.

"Dear," he said quietly, "I am complimenting your intelligence by
asking you to be my mistress without having first seduced you."

Mistress!

Her mind shouted the word, shouted that she had been vilely
insulted.  But in that first startled moment she did not feel
insulted.  She only felt a furious surge of indignation that he
should think her such a fool.  He must think her a fool if he
offered her a proposition like that, instead of the proposal of
matrimony she had been expecting.  Rage, punctured vanity and
disappointment threw her mind into a turmoil and, before she even
thought of the high moral grounds on which she should upbraid him,
she blurted out the first words which came to her lips--

"Mistress!  What would I get out of that except a passel of brats?"

And then her jaw dropped in horror as she realized what she had
said.  He laughed until he choked, peering at her in the shadows as
she sat, stricken dumb, pressing her handkerchief to her mouth.

"That's why I like you!  You are the only frank woman I know, the
only woman who looks on the practical side of matters without
beclouding the issue with mouthings about sin and morality.  Any
other woman would have swooned first and then shown me the door."

Scarlett leaped to her feet, her face red with shame.  How could
she have said such a thing!  How could she, Ellen's daughter, with
her upbringing, have sat there and listened to such debasing words
and then made such a shameless reply?  She should have screamed.
She should have fainted.  She should have turned coldly away in
silence and swept from the porch.  Too late now!

"I will show you the door," she shouted, not caring if Melanie or
the Meades, down the street, did hear her.  "Get out!  How dare you
say such things to me!  What have I ever done to encourage you--to
make you suppose. . . .  Get out and don't ever come back here.  I
mean it this time.  Don't you ever come back here with any of your
piddling papers of pins and ribbons, thinking I'll forgive you.
I'll--I'll tell my father and he'll kill you!"

He picked up his hat and bowed and she saw in the light of the lamp
that his teeth were showing in a smile beneath his mustache.  He
was not ashamed, he was amused at what she had said, and he was
watching her with alert interest.

Oh, he was detestable!  She swung round on her heel and marched
into the house.  She grabbed hold of the door to shut it with a
bang, but the hook which held it open was too heavy for her.  She
struggled with it, panting.

"May I help you?" he asked.

Feeling that she would burst a blood vessel if she stayed another
minute, she stormed up the stairs.  And as she reached the upper
floor, she heard him obligingly slam the door for her.



CHAPTER XX


As the hot noisy days of August were drawing to a close the
bombardment abruptly ceased.  The quiet that fell on the town was
startling.  Neighbors met on the streets and stared at one another,
uncertain, uneasy, as to what might be impending.  The stillness,
after the screaming days, brought no surcease to strained nerves
but, if possible, made the strain even worse.  No one knew why the
Yankee batteries were silent; there was no news of the troops
except that they had been withdrawn in large numbers from the
breastworks about the town and had marched off toward the south to
defend the railroad.  No one knew where the fighting was, if indeed
there was any fighting, or how the battle was going if there was a
battle.

Nowadays the only news was that which passed from mouth to mouth.
Short of paper, short of ink, short of men, the newspapers had
suspended publication after the siege began, and the wildest rumors
appeared from nowhere and swept through the town.  Now, in the
anxious quiet, crowds stormed General Hood's headquarters demanding
information, crowds massed about the telegraph office and the depot
hoping for tidings, good tidings, for everyone hoped that the
silence of Sherman's cannon meant that the Yankees were in full
retreat and the Confederates chasing them back up the road to
Dalton.  But no news came.  The telegraph wires were still, no
trains came in on the one remaining railroad from the south and the
mail service was broken.

Autumn with its dusty, breathless heat was slipping in to choke the
suddenly quiet town, adding its dry, panting weight to tired,
anxious hearts.  To Scarlett, mad to hear from Tara, yet trying to
keep up a brave face, it seemed an eternity since the siege began,
seemed as though she had always lived with the sound of cannon in
her ears until this sinister quiet had fallen.  And yet, it was
only thirty days since the siege began.  Thirty days of siege!  The
city ringed with red-clay rifle pits, the monotonous booming of
cannon that never rested, the long lines of ambulances and ox carts
dripping blood down the dusty streets toward the hospitals, the
overworked burial squads dragging out men when they were hardly
cold and dumping them like so many logs in endless rows of shallow
ditches.  Only thirty days!

And it was only four months since the Yankees moved south from
Dalton!  Only four months!  Scarlett thought, looking back on that
far day, that it had occurred in another life.  Oh, no!  Surely not
just four months.  It had been a lifetime.

Four months ago!  Why, four months ago Dalton, Resaca, Kennesaw
Mountain had been to her only names of places on the railroad.  Now
they were battles, battles desperately, vainly fought as Johnston
fell back toward Atlanta.  And now, Peachtree Creek, Decatur, Ezra
Church and Utoy Creek were no longer pleasant names of pleasant
places.  Never again could she think of them as quiet villages full
of welcoming friends, as green places where she picnicked with
handsome officers on the soft banks of slow-moving streams.  These
names meant battles too, and the soft green grasses where she had
sat were cut to bits by heavy cannon wheels, trampled by desperate
feet when bayonet met bayonet and flattened where bodies threshed
in agonies. . . .  And the lazy streams were redder now than ever
Georgia clay could make them.  Peachtree Creek was crimson, so they
said, after the Yankees crossed it.  Peachtree Creek, Decatur, Ezra
Church, Utoy Creek.  Never names of places any more.  Names of
graves where friends lay buried, names of tangled underbrush and
thick woods where bodies rotted unburied, names of the four sides
of Atlanta where Sherman had tried to force his army in and Hood's
men had doggedly beaten him back.

At last, news came from the south to the strained town and it was
alarming news, especially to Scarlett.  General Sherman was trying
the fourth side of the town again, striking again at the railroad
at Jonesboro.  Yankees in large numbers were on that fourth side of
the town now, no skirmishing units or cavalry detachments but the
massed Yankee forces.  And thousands of Confederate troops had been
withdrawn from the lines close about the city to hurl themselves
against them.  And that explained the sudden silence.

"Why Jonesboro?" thought Scarlett, terror striking at her heart at
the thought of Tara's nearness.  "Why must they always hit
Jonesboro?  Why can't they find some other place to attack the
railroad?"

For a week she had not heard from Tara and the last brief note from
Gerald had added to her fears.  Carreen had taken a turn for the
worse and was very, very sick.  Now it might be days before the
mails came through, days before she heard whether Carreen was alive
or dead.  Oh, if she had only gone home at the beginning of the
siege, Melanie or no Melanie!

There was fighting at Jonesboro--that much Atlanta knew, but how
the battle went no one could tell and the most insane rumors
tortured the town.  Finally a courier came up from Jonesboro with
the reassuring news that the Yankees had been beaten back.  But
they had made a sortie into Jonesboro, burned the depot, cut the
telegraph wires and torn up three miles of track before they
retreated.  The engineering corps was working like mad, repairing
the line, but it would take some time because the Yankees had torn
up the crossties, made bonfires of them, laid the wrenched-up rails
across them until they were red hot and then twisted them around
telegraph poles until they looked like giant corkscrews.  These
days it was so hard to replace iron rails, to replace anything made
of iron.

No, the Yankees hadn't gotten to Tara.  The same courier who
brought the dispatches to General Hood assured Scarlett of that.
He had met Gerald in Jonesboro after the battle, just as he was
starting to Atlanta, and Gerald had begged him to bring a letter to
her.

But what was Pa doing in Jonesboro?  The young courier looked ill
at ease as he made answer.  Gerald was hunting for an army doctor
to go to Tara with him.

As she stood in the sunshine on the front porch, thanking the young
man for his trouble, Scarlett felt her knees go weak.  Carreen must
be dying if she was so far beyond Ellen's medical skill that Gerald
was hunting a doctor!  As the courier went off in a small whirlwind
of red dust, Scarlett tore open Gerald's letter with fingers that
trembled.  So great was the shortage of paper in the Confederacy
now that Gerald's note was written between the lines of her last
letter to him and reading it was difficult.

"Dear Daughter, Your Mother and both girls have the typhoid.  They
are very ill but we must hope for the best.  When your mother took
to her bed she bade me write you that under no condition were you
to come home and expose yourself and Wade to the disease.  She
sends her love and bids you pray for her."

"Pray for her!"  Scarlett flew up the stairs to her room and,
dropping on her knees by the bed, prayed as she had never prayed
before.  No formal Rosaries now but the same words over and over:
"Mother of God, don't let her die!  I'll be so good if you don't
let her die! Please, don't let her die!"

For the next week Scarlett crept about the house like a stricken
animal, waiting for news, starting at every sound of horses'
hooves, rushing down the dark stair at night when soldiers came
tapping at the door, but no news came from Tara.  The width of the
continent might have spread between her and home instead of twenty-
five miles of dusty road.

The mails were still disrupted, no one knew where the Confederates
were or what the Yankees were up to.  No one knew anything except
that thousands of soldiers, gray and blue, were somewhere between
Atlanta and Jonesboro.  Not a word from Tara in a week.

Scarlett had seen enough typhoid in the Atlanta hospital to know
what a week meant in that dread disease.  Ellen was ill, perhaps
dying, and here was Scarlett helpless in Atlanta with a pregnant
woman on her hands and two armies between her and home.  Ellen was
ill--perhaps dying.  But Ellen couldn't be ill!  She had never been
ill.  The very thought was incredible and it struck at the very
foundations of the security of Scarlett's life.  Everyone else got
sick, but never Ellen.  Ellen looked after sick people and made
them well again.  She couldn't be sick.  Scarlett wanted to be
home.  She wanted Tara with the desperate desire of a frightened
child frantic for the only haven it had ever known.

Home!  The sprawling white house with fluttering white curtains at
the windows, the thick clover on the lawn with the bees busy in it,
the little black boy on the front steps shooing the ducks and
turkeys from the flower beds, the serene red fields and the miles
and miles of cotton turning white in the sun!  Home!

If she had only gone home at the beginning of the siege, when
everyone else was refugeeing!  She could have taken Melanie with
her in safety with weeks to spare.

"Oh, damn Melanie!" she thought a thousand times.  "Why couldn't
she have gone to Macon with Aunt Pitty?  That's where she belongs,
with her own kinfolks, not with me.  I'm none of her blood.  Why
does she hang onto me so hard?  If she'd only gone to Macon, then
I could have gone home to Mother.  Even now--even now, I'd take a
chance on getting home in spite of the Yankees, if it wasn't for
this baby.  Maybe General Hood would give me an escort.  He's a
nice man, General Hood, and I know I could make him give me an
escort and a flag of truce to get me through the lines.  But I have
to wait for this baby! . . .  Oh, Mother!  Mother!  Don't die! . . .
Why don't this baby ever come?  I'll see Dr. Meade today and ask
him if there's any way to hurry babies up so I can go home--if I
can get an escort.  Dr. Meade said she'd have a bad time.  Dear
God!  Suppose she should die!  Melanie dead.  Melanie dead.  And
Ashley--  No, I mustn't think about that, it isn't nice.  But
Ashley--  No, I mustn't think about that because he's probably
dead, anyway.  But he made me promise I'd take care of her.  But--
if I didn't take care of her and she died and Ashley is still
alive--  No, I mustn't think about that.  It's sinful.  And I
promised God I'd be good if He would just not let Mother die.  Oh,
if the baby would only come.  If I could only get away from here--
get home--get anywhere but here."

Scarlett hated the sight of the ominously still town now and once
she had loved it.  Atlanta was no longer the gay, the desperately
gay place she had loved.  It was a hideous place like a plague-
stricken city so quiet, so dreadfully quiet after the din of the
siege.  There had been stimulation in the noise and the danger of
the shelling.  There was only horror in the quiet that followed.
The town seemed haunted, haunted with fear and uncertainty and
memories.  People's faces looked pinched and the few soldiers
Scarlett saw wore the exhausted look of racers forcing themselves
on through the last lap of a race already lost.

The last day of August came and with it convincing rumors that the
fiercest fighting since the battle of Atlanta was taking place.
Somewhere to the south.  Atlanta, waiting for news of the turn of
battle, stopped even trying to laugh and joke.  Everyone knew now
what the soldiers had known two weeks before--that Atlanta was in
the last ditch, that if the Macon railroad fell, Atlanta would fall
too.



On the morning of the first of September, Scarlett awoke with a
suffocating sense of dread upon her, a dread she had taken to her
pillow the night before.  She thought, dulled with sleep:  "What
was it I was worrying about when I went to bed last night?  Oh,
yes, the fighting.  There was a battle, somewhere, yesterday!  Oh,
who won?"  She sat up hastily, rubbing her eyes, and her worried
heart took up yesterday's load again.

The air was oppressive even in the early morning hour, hot with the
scorching promise of a noon of glaring blue sky and pitiless bronze
sun.  The road outside lay silent.  No wagons creaked by.  No
troops raised the red dust with their tramping feet.  There were no
sounds of negroes' lazy voices in neighboring kitchens, no pleasant
sounds of breakfasts being prepared, for all the near neighbors
except Mrs. Meade and Mrs. Merriwether had refugeed to Macon.  And
she could hear nothing from their houses either.  Farther down the
street the business section was quiet and many of the stores and
offices were locked and boarded up, while their occupants were
somewhere about the countryside with rifles in their hands.

The stillness that greeted her seemed even more sinister this
morning than on any of the mornings of the queer quiet week
preceding it.  She rose hastily, without her usual preliminary
burrowings and stretchings, and went to the window, hoping to see
some neighbor's face, some heartening sight.  But the road was
empty.  She noted how the leaves on the trees were still dark green
but dry and heavily coated with red dust, and how withered and sad
the untended flowers in the front yard looked.

As she stood, looking out of the window, there came to her ears a
far-off sound, faint and sullen as the first distant thunder of an
approaching storm.

"Rain," she thought in the first moment, and her country-bred mind
added, "we certainly need it."  But, in a split instant:  "Rain?
No!  Not rain!  Cannon!"

Her heart racing, she leaned from the window, her ear cocked to the
far-off roaring, trying to discover from which direction it came.
But the dim thundering was so distant that, for a moment, she could
not tell.  "Make it from Marietta, Lord!" she prayed.  "Or Decatur.
Or Peachtree Creek.  But not from the south!  Not from the south!"
She gripped the window still tighter and strained her ears and the
far-away booming seemed louder.  And it was coming from the south.

Cannon to the south!  And to the south lay Jonesboro and Tara--and
Ellen.

Yankees perhaps at Tara, now, this minute!  She listened again but
the blood thudding in her ears all but blurred out the sound of
far-off firing.  No, they couldn't be at Jonesboro yet.  If they
were that far away, the sound would be fainter, more indistinct.
But they must be at least ten miles down the road toward Jonesboro,
probably near the little settlement of Rough and Ready.  But
Jonesboro was scarcely more than ten miles below Rough and Ready.

Cannon to the south, and they might be tolling the knell of
Atlanta's fall.  But to Scarlett, sick for her mother's safety,
fighting to the south only meant fighting near Tara.  She walked
the floor and wrung her hands and for the first time the thought in
all its implications came to her that the gray army might be
defeated.  It was the thought of Sherman's thousands so close to
Tara that brought it all home to her, brought the full horror of
the war to her as no sound of siege guns shattering windowpanes, no
privations of food and clothing and no endless rows of dying men
had done.  Sherman's army within a few miles of Tara!  And even if
the Yankees should be defeated, they might fall back down the road
to Tara.  And Gerald couldn't possibly refugee out of their way
with three sick women.

Oh, if she were only there now, Yankees or not.  She paced the
floor in her bare feet, her nightgown clinging to her legs and the
more she walked the stronger became her foreboding.  She wanted to
be at home.  She wanted to be near Ellen.

From the kitchen below, she heard the rattle of china as Prissy
prepared breakfast, but no sound of Mrs. Meade's Betsy.  The
shrill, melancholy minor of Prissy was raised, "Jes' a few mo'
days, ter tote de wee-ry load . . ."  The song grated on Scarlett,
its sad implications frightening her, and slipping on a wrapper she
pattered out into the hall and to the back stairs and shouted:
"Shut up that singing, Prissy!"

A sullen "Yas'm" drifted up to her and she drew a deep breath,
feeling suddenly ashamed of herself.

"Where's Betsy?"

"Ah doan know.  She ain' came."

Scarlett walked to Melanie's door and opened it a crack, peering
into the sunny room.  Melanie lay in bed in her nightgown, her eyes
closed and circled with black, her heart-shaped face bloated, her
slender body hideous and distorted.  Scarlett wished viciously that
Ashley could see her now.  She looked worse than any pregnant woman
she had ever seen.  As she looked, Melanie's eyes opened and a soft
warm smile lit her face.

"Come in," she invited, turning awkwardly on her side.  "I've been
awake since sun-up thinking, and, Scarlett, there's something I
want to ask you."

She entered the room and sat down on the bed that was glaring with
harsh sunshine.

Melanie reached out and took Scarlett's hand in a gentle confiding
clasp.

"Dear," she said, "I'm sorry about the cannon.  It's toward
Jonesboro, isn't it?"

Scarlett said "Um," her heart beginning to beat faster as the
thought recurred.

"I know how worried you are.  I know you'd have gone home last week
when you heard about your mother, if it hadn't been for me.
Wouldn't you?"

"Yes," said Scarlett ungraciously.

"Scarlett, darling.  You've been so good to me.  No sister could
have been sweeter or braver.  And I love you for it.  I'm so sorry
I'm in the way."

Scarlett stared.  Loved her, did she?  The fool!

"And Scarlett, I've been lying here thinking and I want to ask a
very great favor of you."  Her clasp tightened.  "If I should die,
will you take my baby?"

Melanie's eyes were wide and bright with soft urgency.

"Will you?"

Scarlett jerked away her hand as fear swamped her.  Fear roughened
her voice as she spoke.

"Oh, don't be a goose, Melly.  You aren't going to die.  Every
woman thinks she's going to die with her first baby.  I know I
did."

"No, you didn't.  You've never been afraid of anything.  You are
just saying that to try to cheer me up.  I'm not afraid to die but
I'm so afraid to leave the baby, if Ashley is--  Scarlett, promise
me that you'll take my baby if I should die.  Then I won't be
afraid.  Aunt Pittypat is too old to raise a child and Honey and
India are sweet but--I want you to have my baby.  Promise me,
Scarlett.  And if it's a boy, bring him up like Ashley, and if it's
a girl--dear, I'd like her to be like you."

"God's nightgown!" cried Scarlett, leaping from the bed.  "Aren't
things bad enough without you talking about dying?"

"I'm sorry, dear.  But promise me.  I think it'll be today.  I'm
sure it'll be today.  Please promise me."

"Oh, all right, I promise," said Scarlett, looking down at her in
bewilderment.

Was Melanie such a fool she really didn't know how she cared for
Ashley?  Or did she know everything and feel that because of that
love, Scarlett would take good care of Ashley's child?  Scarlett
had a wild impulse to cry out questions, but they died on her lips
as Melanie took her hand and held it for an instant against her
cheek.  Tranquillity had come back into her eyes.

"Why do you think it will be today, Melly?"

"I've been having pains since dawn--but not very bad ones."

"You have?  Well, why didn't you call me?  I'll send Prissy for Dr.
Meade."

"No, don't do that yet, Scarlett.  You know how busy he is, how
busy they all are.  Just send word to him that we'll need him some
time today.  Send over to Mrs. Meade's and tell her and ask her to
come over and sit with me.  She'll know when to really send for
him."

"Oh, stop being so unselfish.  You know you need a doctor as much
as anybody in the hospital.  I'll send for him right away."

"No, please don't.  Sometimes it takes all day having a baby and I
just couldn't let the doctor sit here for hours when all those poor
boys need him so much.  Just send for Mrs. Meade.  She'll know."

"Oh, all right," said Scarlett.



CHAPTER XXI


After sending up Melanie's breakfast tray, Scarlett dispatched
Prissy for Mrs. Meade and sat down with Wade to eat her own
breakfast.  But for once she had no appetite.  Between her nervous
apprehension over the thought that Melanie's time was approaching
and her unconscious straining to hear the sound of the cannon, she
could hardly eat.  Her heart acted very queerly, beating regularly
for several minutes and then thumping so loudly and swiftly it
almost made her sick at her stomach.  The heavy hominy stuck in her
throat like glue and never before had the mixture of parched corn
and ground-up yams that passed for coffee been so repulsive.
Without sugar or cream it was bitter as gall, for the sorghum used
for "long sweetening" did little to improve the taste.  After one
swallow she pushed her cup away.  If for no other reason she hated
the Yankees because they kept her from having real coffee with
sugar and thick cream in it.

Wade was quieter than usual and did not set up his every morning
complaint against the hominy that he so disliked.  He ate silently
the spoonfuls she pushed into his mouth and washed them down with
noisily gulped water.  His soft brown eyes followed her every
movement, large, round as dollars, a childish bewilderment in them
as though her own scarce-hidden fears had been communicated to him.
When he had finished she sent him off to the back yard to play and
watched him toddle across the straggling grass to his playhouse
with great relief.

She arose and stood irresolutely at the foot of the stairs.  She
should go up and sit with Melanie and distract her mind from her
coming ordeal but she did not feel equal to it.  Of all days in the
world, Melanie had to pick this day to have the baby!  And of all
days to talk about dying!

She sat down on the bottom step of the stairs and tried to compose
herself, wondering again how yesterday's battle had gone, wondering
how today's fighting was going.  How strange to have a big battle
going on just a few miles away and to know nothing of it!  How
strange the quiet of this deserted end of town in contrast with the
day of the fighting at Peachtree Creek!  Aunt Pitty's house was one
of the last on the north side of Atlanta and with the fighting
somewhere to the far south, there were no reinforcements going by
at double-quick, no ambulances and staggering lines of walking
wounded coming back.  She wondered if such scenes were being
enacted on the south side of town and thanked God she was not
there.  If only everyone except the Meades and the Merriwethers had
not refugeed from this north end of Peachtree!  It made her feel
forsaken and alone.  She wished fervently that Uncle Peter were
with her so he could go down to headquarters and learn the news.
If it wasn't for Melanie she'd go to town this very minute and
learn for herself, but she couldn't leave until Mrs. Meade arrived.
Mrs. Meade.  Why didn't she come on?  And where was Prissy?

She rose and went out onto the front porch and looked for them
impatiently, but the Meade house was around a shady bend in the
street and she could see no one.  After a long while Prissy came
into view, alone, switching her skirts from side to side and
looking over her shoulder to observe the effect.

"You're as slow as molasses in January," snapped Scarlett as Prissy
opened the gate.  "What did Mrs. Meade say?  How soon will she be
over here?"

"She warn't dar," said Prissy.

"Where is she?  When will she be home?"

"Well'm," answered Prissy, dragging out her words pleasurably to
give more weight to her message.  "Dey Cookie say Miss Meade done
got wud early dis mawnin' dat young Mist' Phil done been shot an'
Miss Meade she tuck de cah'ige an' Ole Talbot an' Betsy an' dey
done gone ter fotch him home.  Cookie say he bad hurt an' Miss
Meade ain' gwine ter be studyin' 'bout comin' up hyah."

Scarlett stared at her and had an impulse to shake her.  Negroes
were always so proud of being the bearers of evil tidings.

"Well, don't stand there like a ninny.  Go down to Mrs.
Merriwether's and ask her to come up or send her mammy.  Now,
hurry."

"Dey ain' dar, Miss Scarlett.  Ah drapped in ter pass time of de
day wid Mammy on mah way home.  Dey's done gone.  House all locked
up.  Spec dey's at de horsepittle."

"So that's where you were so long!  Whenever I send you somewhere
you go where I tell you and don't stop to 'pass any time' with
anybody.  Go--"

She stopped and racked her brain.  Who was left in town among their
friends who would be helpful?  There was Mrs. Elsing.  Of course,
Mrs. Elsing didn't like her at all these days but she had always
been fond of Melanie.

"Go to Mrs. Elsing's, and explain everything very carefully and
tell her to please come up here.  And, Prissy, listen to me.  Miss
Melly's baby is due and she may need you any minute now.  Now you
hurry right straight back."

"Yas'm," said Prissy and, turning, sauntered down the walk at
snail's gait.

"Hurry, you slow poke!"

"Yas'm."

Prissy quickened her gait infinitesimally and Scarlett went back
into the house.  She hesitated again before going upstairs to
Melanie.  She would have to explain to her just why Mrs. Meade
couldn't come and the knowledge that Phil Meade was badly wounded
might upset her.  Well, she'd tell a lie about it.

She entered Melanie's room and saw that the breakfast tray was
untouched.  Melanie lay on her side, her face white.

"Mrs. Meade's over at the hospital," said Scarlett.  "But Mrs.
Elsing is coming.  Do you feel bad?"

"Not very," lied Melanie.  "Scarlett, how long did it take Wade to
get born?"

"Less than no time," answered Scarlett with a cheerfulness she was
far from feeling.  "I was out in the yard and I didn't hardly have
time to get into the house.  Mammy said it was scandalous--just
like one of the darkies."

"I hope I'll be like one of the darkies too," said Melanie,
mustering a smile which suddenly disappeared as pain contorted her
face.

Scarlett looked down at Melanie's tiny hips with none too sanguine
hopes but said reassuringly:  "Oh, it's not really so bad."

"Oh, I know it isn't.  I'm afraid I'm a little coward.  Is--is Mrs.
Elsing coming right away?"

"Yes, right away," said Scarlett.  "I'll go down and get some fresh
water and sponge you off.  It's so hot today."

She took as long a time as possible in getting the water, running
to the front door every two minutes to see if Prissy were coming.
There was no sign of Prissy so she went back upstairs, sponged
Melanie's perspiring body and combed out her long dark hair.

When an hour had passed she heard scuffing negro feet coming down
the street, and looking out of the window, saw Prissy returning
slowly, switching herself as before and tossing her head with as
many airy affectations as if she had a large and interested
audience.

"Some day, I'm going to take a strap to that little wench," thought
Scarlett savagely, hurrying down the stairs to meet her.

"Miss Elsing ober at de horsepittle.  Dey Cookie 'lows a whole lot
of wounded sojers come in on de early train.  Cookie fixin' soup
ter tek over dar.  She say--"

"Never mind what she said," interrupted Scarlett, her heart
sinking.  "Put on a clean apron because I want you to go over to
the hospital.  I'm going to give you a note to Dr. Meade, and if he
isn't there, give it to Dr. Jones or any of the other doctors.  And
if you don't hurry back this time, I'll skin you alive."

"Yas'm."

"And ask any of the gentlemen for news of the fighting.  If they
don't know, go by the depot and ask the engineers who brought the
wounded in.  Ask if they are fighting at Jonesboro or near there."

"Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett!" and sudden fright was in Prissy's
black face.  "De Yankees ain' at Tara, is dey?"

"I don't know.  I'm telling you to ask for news."

"Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett!  Whut'll dey do ter Maw?"

Prissy began to bawl suddenly, loudly, the sound adding to
Scarlett's own uneasiness.

"Stop bawling!  Miss Melanie will hear you.  Now go change your
apron, quick."

Spurred to speed, Prissy hurried toward the back of the house while
Scarlett scratched a hasty note on the margin of Gerald's last
letter to her--the only bit of paper in the house.  As she folded
it, so that her note was uppermost, she caught Gerald's words,
"Your mother--typhoid--under no condition--to come home--"  She
almost sobbed.  If it wasn't for Melanie, she'd start home, right
this minute, if she had to walk every step of the way.

Prissy went off at a trot, the letter gripped in her hand, and
Scarlett went back upstairs, trying to think of some plausible lie
to explain Mrs. Elsing's failure to appear.  But Melanie asked no
questions.  She lay upon her back, her face tranquil and sweet, and
the sight of her quieted Scarlett for a while.

She sat down and tried to talk of inconsequential things, but the
thoughts of Tara and a possible defeat by the Yankees prodded
cruelly.  She thought of Ellen dying and of the Yankees coming into
Atlanta, burning everything, killing everybody.  Through it all,
the dull far-off thundering persisted, rolling into her ears in
waves of fear.  Finally, she could not talk at all and only stared
out of the window at the hot still street and the dusty leaves
hanging motionless on the trees.  Melanie was silent too, but at
intervals her quiet face was wrenched with pain.

She said, after each pain:  "It wasn't very bad, really," and
Scarlett knew she was lying.  She would have preferred a loud
scream to silent endurance.  She knew she should feel sorry for
Melanie, but somehow she could not muster a spark of sympathy.  Her
mind was too torn with her own anguish.  Once she looked sharply at
the pain-twisted face and wondered why it should be that she, of
all people in the world, should be here with Melanie at this
particular time--she who had nothing in common with her, who hated
her, who would gladly have seen her dead.  Well, maybe she'd have
her wish, and before the day was over too.  A cold superstitious
fear swept her at this thought.  It was bad luck to wish that
someone were dead, almost as bad luck as to curse someone.  Curses
came home to roost, Mammy said.  She hastily prayed that Melanie
wouldn't die and broke into feverish small talk, hardly aware of
what she said.  At last, Melanie put a hot hand on her wrist.

"Don't bother about talking, dear.  I know how worried you are.
I'm so sorry I'm so much trouble."

Scarlett relapsed into silence but she could not sit still.  What
would she do if neither the doctor nor Prissy got there in time?
She walked to the window and looked down the street and came back
and sat down again.  Then she rose and looked out of the window on
the other side of the room.

An hour went by and then another.  Noon came and the sun was high
and hot and not a breath of air stirred the dusty leaves.
Melanie's pains were harder now.  Her long hair was drenched in
sweat and her gown stuck in wet spots to her body.  Scarlett
sponged her face in silence but fear was gnawing at her.  God in
Heaven, suppose the baby came before the doctor arrived!  What
would she do?  She knew less than nothing of midwifery.  This was
exactly the emergency she had been dreading for weeks.  She had
been counting on Prissy to handle the situation if no doctor should
be available.  Prissy knew all about midwifery.  She'd said so time
and again.  But where was Prissy?  Why didn't she come?  Why didn't
the doctor come?  She went to the window and looked again.  She
listened hard and suddenly she wondered if it were only her
imagination or if the sound of cannon in the distance had died
away.  If it were farther away it would mean that the fighting was
nearer Jonesboro and that would mean--

At last she saw Prissy coming down the street at a quick trot and
she leaned out of the window.  Prissy, looking up, saw her and her
mouth opened to yell.  Seeing the panic written on the little black
face and fearing she might alarm Melanie by crying out evil
tidings, Scarlett hastily put her finger to her lips and left the
window.

"I'll get some cooler water," she said, looking down into Melanie's
dark, deep-circled eyes and trying to smile.  Then she hastily left
the room, closing the door carefully behind her.

Prissy was sitting on the bottom step in the hall, panting.

"Dey's fightin' at Jonesboro, Miss Scarlett!  Dey say our gempmums
is gittin' beat.  Oh, Gawd, Miss Scarlett!  Whut'll happen ter Maw
an' Poke?  Oh, Gawd, Miss Scarlett!  Whut'll happen ter us effen de
Yankees gits hyah?  Oh, Gawd--"

Scarlett clapped a hand over the blubbery mouth.

"For God's sake, hush!"

Yes, what would happen to them if the Yankees came--what would
happen to Tara?  She pushed the thought firmly back into her mind
and grappled with the more pressing emergency.  If she thought of
these things, she'd begin to scream and bawl like Prissy.

"Where's Dr. Meade?  When's he coming?"

"Ah ain' nebber seed him, Miss Scarlett."

"What!"

"No'm, he ain' at de horsepittle.  Miss Merriwether an' Miss Elsing
ain' dar needer.  A man he tole me de doctah down by de car shed
wid the wounded sojers jes' come in frum Jonesboro, but Miss
Scarlett, Ah wuz sceered ter go down dar ter de shed--dey's folkses
dyin' down dar.  Ah's sceered of daid folkses--"

"What about the other doctors?"

"Miss Scarlett, fo' Gawd, Ah couldn' sceercely git one of dem ter
read yo' note.  Dey wukin' in de horsepittle lak dey all done gone
crazy.  One doctah he say ter me, 'Damn yo' hide!  Doan you come
roun' hyah bodderin' me 'bout babies w'en we got a mess of men
dyin' hyah.  Git some woman ter he'p you.'  An' den Ah went aroun'
an' about an' ask fer news lak you done tole me an' dey all say
'fightin' at Jonesboro' an' Ah--"

"You say Dr. Meade's at the depot?"

"Yas'm.  He--"

"Now, listen sharp to me.  I'm going to get Dr. Meade and I want
you to sit by Miss Melanie and do anything she says.  And if you so
much as breathe to her where the fighting is, I'll sell you South
as sure as gun's iron.  And don't you tell her that the other
doctors wouldn't come either.  Do you hear?"

"Yas'm."

"Wipe your eyes and get a fresh pitcher of water and go on up.
Sponge her off.  Tell her I've gone for Dr. Meade."

"Is her time nigh, Miss Scarlett?"

"I don't know.  I'm afraid it is but I don't know.  You should
know.  Go on up."

Scarlett caught up her wide straw bonnet from the console table and
jammed it on her head.  She looked in the mirror and automatically
pushed up loose strands of hair but she did not see her own
reflection.  Cold little ripples of fear that started in the pit of
her stomach were radiating outward until the fingers that touched
her cheeks were cold, though the rest of her body streamed
perspiration.  She hurried out of the house and into the heat of
the sun.  It was blindingly, glaring hot and as she hurried down
Peachtree Street her temples began to throb from the heat.  From
far down the street she could hear the rise and fall and roar of
many voices.  By the time she caught sight of the Leyden house, she
was beginning to pant, for her stays were tightly laced, but she
did not slow her gait.  The roar of noise grew louder.

From the Leyden house down to Five Points, the street seethed with
activity, the activity of an anthill just destroyed.  Negroes were
running up and down the street, panic in their faces; and on
porches, white children sat crying untended.  The street was
crowded with army wagons and ambulances filled with wounded and
carriages piled high with valises and pieces of furniture.  Men on
horseback dashed out of side streets pell-mell down Peachtree
toward Hood's headquarters.  In front of the Bonnell house, old
Amos stood holding the head of the carriage horse and he greeted
Scarlett with rolling eyes.

"Ain't you gone yit, Miss Scarlett?  We is goin' now.  Ole Miss
packin' her bag."

"Going?  Where?"

"Gawd knows, Miss.  Somewheres.  De Yankees is comin'!"

She hurried on, not even saying good-by.  The Yankees were coming!
At Wesley Chapel, she paused to catch her breath and wait for her
hammering heart to subside.  If she did not quiet herself she would
certainly faint.  As she stood clutching a lamp post for support,
she saw an officer on horseback come charging up the street from
Five Points and, on an impulse, she ran out into the street and
waved at him.

"Oh, stop!  Please, stop!"

He reined in so suddenly the horse went back on its haunches,
pawing the air.  There were harsh lines of fatigue and urgency in
his face but his tattered gray hat was off with a sweep.

"Madam?"

"Tell me, is it true?  Are the Yankees coming?"

"I'm afraid so."

"Do you know so?"

"Yes, Ma'm.  I know so.  A dispatch came in to headquarters half an
hour ago from the fighting at Jonesboro."

"At Jonesboro?  Are you sure?"

"I'm sure.  There's no use telling pretty lies, Madam.  The message
was from General Hardee and it said:  'I have lost the battle and
am in full retreat.'"

"Oh, my God!"

The dark face of the tired man looked down without emotion.  He
gathered the reins again and put on his hat.

"Oh, sir, please, just a minute.  What shall we do?"

"Madam, I can't say.  The army is evacuating Atlanta soon."

"Going off and leaving us to the Yankees?"

"I'm afraid so."

The spurred horse went off as though on springs and Scarlett was
left standing in the middle of the street with the red dust thick
upon her ankles.

The Yankees were coming.  The army was leaving.  The Yankees were
coming.  What should she do?  Where should she run?  No, she
couldn't run.  There was Melanie back there in the bed expecting
that baby.  Oh, why did women have babies?  If it wasn't for
Melanie she could take Wade and Prissy and hide in the woods where
the Yankees could never find them.  But she couldn't take Melanie
to the woods.  No, not now.  Oh, if she'd only had the baby sooner,
yesterday even, perhaps they could get an ambulance and take her
away and hide her somewhere.  But now--she must find Dr. Meade and
make him come home with her.  Perhaps he could hurry the baby.

She gathered up her skirts and ran down the street, and the rhythm
of her feet was "The Yankees are coming!  The Yankees are coming!"
Five Points was crowded with people who rushed here and there with
unseeing eyes, jammed with wagons, ambulances, ox carts, carriages
loaded with wounded.  A roaring sound like the breaking of surf
rose from the crowd.

Then a strangely incongruous sight struck her eyes.  Throngs of
women were coming up from the direction of the railroad tracks
carrying hams across their shoulders.  Little children hurried by
their sides, staggering under buckets of steaming molasses.  Young
boys dragged sacks of corn and potatoes.  One old man struggled
along with a small barrel of flour on a wheelbarrow.  Men, women
and children, black and white, hurried, hurried with straining
faces, lugging packages and sacks and boxes of food--more food than
she had seen in a year.  The crowd suddenly gave a lane for a
careening carriage and through the lane came the frail and elegant
Mrs. Elsing, standing up in the front of her victoria, reins in one
hand, whip in the other.  She was hatless and white faced and her
long gray hair streamed down her back as she lashed the horse like
a Fury.  Jouncing on the back seat of the carriage was her black
mammy, Melissy, clutching a greasy side of bacon to her with one
hand, while with the other and both feet she attempted to hold the
boxes and bags piled all about her.  One bag of dried peas had
burst and the peas strewed themselves into the street.  Scarlett
screamed to her, but the tumult of the crowd drowned her voice and
the carriage rocked madly by.

For a moment she could not understand what it all meant and then,
remembering that the commissary warehouses were down by the
railroad tracks, she realized that the army had thrown them open to
the people to salvage what they could before the Yankees came.

She pushed her way swiftly through the crowds, past the packed,
hysterical mob surging in the open space of Five Points, and
hurried as fast as she could down the short block toward the depot.
Through the tangle of ambulances and the clouds of dust, she could
see doctors and stretcher bearers bending, lifting, hurrying.
Thank God, she'd find Dr. Meade soon.  As she rounded the corner of
the Atlanta Hotel and came in full view of the depot and the
tracks, she halted appalled.

Lying in the pitiless sun, shoulder to shoulder, head to feet, were
hundreds of wounded men, lining the tracks, the sidewalks,
stretched out in endless rows under the car shed.  Some lay stiff
and still but many writhed under the hot sun, moaning.  Everywhere,
swarms of flies hovered over the men, crawling and buzzing in their
faces, everywhere was blood, dirty bandages, groans, screamed
curses of pain as stretcher bearers lifted men.  The smell of
sweat, of blood, of unwashed bodies, of excrement rose up in waves
of blistering heat until the fetid stench almost nauseated her.
The ambulance men hurrying here and there among the prostrate forms
frequently stepped on wounded men, so thickly packed were the rows,
and those trodden upon stared stolidly up, waiting their turn.

She shrank back, clapping her hand to her mouth feeling that she
was going to vomit.  She couldn't go on.  She had seen wounded men
in the hospitals, wounded men on Aunt Pitty's lawn after the
fighting at the creek, but never anything like this.  Never
anything like these stinking, bleeding bodies broiling under the
glaring sun.  This was an inferno of pain and smell and noise and
hurry--hurry--hurry!  The Yankees are coming!  The Yankees are
coming!

She braced her shoulders and went down among them, straining her
eyes among the upright figures to distinguish Dr. Meade.  But she
discovered she could not look for him, for if she did not step
carefully she would tread on some poor soldier.  She raised her
skirts and tried to pick her way among them toward a knot of men
who were directing the stretcher bearers.

As she walked, feverish hands plucked at her skirt and voices
croaked:  "Lady--water!  Please, lady, water!  For Christ's sake,
water!"

Perspiration came down her face in streams as she pulled her skirts
from clutching hands.  If she stepped on one of these men, she'd
scream and faint.  She stepped over dead men, over men who lay dull
eyed with hands clutched to bellies where dried blood had glued
torn uniforms to wounds, over men whose beards were stiff with
blood and from whose broken jaws came sounds which must mean:

"Water!  Water!"

If she did not find Dr. Meade soon, she would begin screaming with
hysteria.  She looked toward the group of men under the car shed
and cried as loudly as she could:

"Dr. Meade!  Is Dr. Meade there?"

From the group one man detached himself and looked toward her.  It
was the doctor.  He was coatless and his sleeves were rolled up to
his shoulders.  His shirt and trousers were as red as a butcher's
and even the end of his iron-gray beard was matted with blood.  His
face was the face of a man drunk with fatigue and impotent rage and
burning pity.  It was gray and dusty, and sweat had streaked long
rivulets across his cheeks.  But his voice was calm and decisive as
he called to her.

"Thank God, you are here.  I can use every pair of hands."

For a moment she stared at him bewildered, dropping her skirts in
dismay.  They fell over the dirty face of a wounded man who feebly
tried to turn his head to escape from their smothering folds.  What
did the doctor mean?  The dust from the ambulances came into her
face with choking dryness, and the rotten smells were like a foul
liquid in her nostrils.

"Hurry, child!  Come here."

She picked up her skirts and went to him as fast as she could go
across the rows of bodies.  She put her hand on his arm and felt
that it was trembling with weariness but there was no weakness in
his face.

"Oh, Doctor!" she cried.  "You must come.  Melanie is having her
baby."

He looked at her as if her words did not register on his mind.  A
man who lay upon the ground at her feet, his head pillowed on his
canteen, grinned up companionably at her words.

"They will do it," he said cheerfully.

She did not even look down but shook the doctor's arm.

"It's Melanie.  The baby.  Doctor, you must come.  She--the--"
This was no time for delicacy but it was hard to bring out the
words with the ears of hundreds of strange men listening.

"The pains are getting hard.  Please, Doctor!"

"A baby?  Great God!" thundered the doctor and his face was
suddenly contorted with hate and rage, a rage not directed at her
or at anyone except a world wherein such things could happen.  "Are
you crazy?  I can't leave these men.  They are dying, hundreds of
them.  I can't leave them for a damned baby.  Get some woman to
help you.  Get my wife."

She opened her mouth to tell him why Mrs. Meade could not come and
then shut it abruptly.  He did not know his own son was wounded!
She wondered if he would still be here if he did know, and
something told her that even if Phil were dying he would still be
standing on this spot, giving aid to the many instead of the one.

"No, you must come, Doctor.  You know you said she'd have a hard
time--"  Was it really she, Scarlett, standing here saying these
dreadful indelicate things at the top of her voice in this hell of
heat and groans?  "She'll die if you don't come!"

He shook off her hand roughly and spoke as though he hardly heard
her, hardly knew what she said.

"Die?  Yes, they'll all die--all these men.  No bandages, no
salves, no quinine, no chloroform.  Oh, God, for some morphia!
Just a little morphia for the worst ones.  Just a little
chloroform.  God damn the Yankees!  God damn the Yankees!"

"Give um hell, Doctor!" said the man on the ground, his teeth
showing in his beard.

Scarlett began to shake and her eyes burned with tears of fright.
The doctor wasn't coming with her.  Melanie would die and she had
wished that she would die.  The doctor wasn't coming.

"Name of God, Doctor!  Please!"

Dr. Meade bit his lip and his jaw hardened as his face went cool
again.

"Child, I'll try.  I can't promise you.  But I'll try.  When we get
these men tended to.  The Yankees are coming and the troops are
moving out of town.  I don't know what they'll do with the wounded.
There aren't any trains.  The Macon line has been captured. . . .
But I'll try.  Run along now.  Don't bother me.  There's nothing
much to bringing a baby.  Just tie up the cord. . . ."

He turned as an orderly touched his arm and began firing directions
and pointing to this and that wounded man.  The man at her feet
looked up at Scarlett compassionately.  She turned away, for the
doctor had forgotten her.

She picked her way rapidly through the wounded and back to
Peachtree Street.  The doctor wasn't coming.  She would have to see
it through herself.  Thank God, Prissy knew all about midwifery.
Her head ached from the heat and she could feel her basque, soaking
wet from perspiration, sticking to her.  Her mind felt numb and so
did her legs, numb as in a nightmare when she tried to run and
could not move them.  She thought of the long walk back to the
house and it seemed interminable.

Then, "The Yankees are coming!" began to beat its refrain in her
mind again.  Her heart began to pound and new life came into her
limbs.  She hurried into the crowd at Five Points, now so thick
there was no room on the narrow sidewalks and she was forced to
walk in the street.  Long lines of soldiers were passing, dust
covered, sodden with weariness.  There seemed thousands of them,
bearded, dirty, their guns slung over their shoulders, swiftly
passing at route step.  Cannon rolled past, the drivers flaying the
thin mules with lengths of rawhide.  Commissary wagons with torn
canvas covers rocked through the ruts.  Cavalry raising clouds of
choking dust went past endlessly.  She had never seen so many
soldiers together before.  Retreat!  Retreat!  The army was moving
out.

The hurrying lines pushed her back onto the packed sidewalk and she
smelled the reek of cheap corn whisky.  There were women in the mob
near Decatur Street, garishly dressed women whose bright finery and
painted faces gave a discordant note of holiday.  Most of them were
drunk and the soldiers on whose arms they hung were drunker.  She
caught a fleeting glimpse of a head of red curls and saw that
creature, Belle Watling, heard her shrill drunken laughter as she
clung for support to a one-armed soldier who reeled and staggered.

When she had shoved and pushed her way through the mob for a block
beyond Five Points the crowd thinned a little and, gathering up her
skirts, she began to run again.  When she reached Wesley Chapel,
she was breathless and dizzy and sick at her stomach.  Her stays
were cutting her ribs in two.  She sank down on the steps of the
church and buried her head in her hands until she could breathe
more easily.  If she could only get one deep breath, way down in
her abdomen.  If her heart would only stop bumping and drumming and
cavorting.  If there were only someone in this mad place to whom
she could turn.

Why, she had never had to do a thing for herself in all her life.
There had always been someone to do things for her, to look after
her, shelter and protect her and spoil her.  It was incredible that
she could be in such a fix.  Not a friend, not a neighbor to help
her.  There had always been friends, neighbors, the competent hands
of willing slaves.  And now in this hour of greatest need, there
was no one.  It was incredible that she could be so completely
alone, and frightened, and far from home.

Home!  If she were only home, Yankees or no Yankees.  Home, even if
Ellen was sick.  She longed for the sight of Ellen's sweet face,
for Mammy's strong arms around her.

She rose dizzily to her feet and started walking again.  When she
came in sight of the house, she saw Wade swinging on the front
gate.  When he saw her, his face puckered and he began to cry,
holding up a grubby bruised finger.

"Hurt!" he sobbed.  "Hurt!"

"Hush!  Hush!  Hush!  Or I'll spank you.  Go out in the back yard
and make mud pies and don't move from there."

"Wade hungwy," he sobbed and put the hurt finger in his mouth.

"I don't care.  Go in the back yard and--"

She looked up and saw Prissy leaning out of the upstairs window,
fright and worry written on her face; but in an instant they were
wiped away in relief as she saw her mistress.  Scarlett beckoned to
her to come down and went into the house.  How cool it was in the
hall.  She untied her bonnet and flung it on the table, drawing her
forearms across her wet forehead.  She heard the upstairs door open
and a low wailing moan, wrenched from the depths of agony, came to
her ears.  Prissy came down the stairs three at a time.

"Is de doctah come?"

"No.  He can't come."

"Gawd, Miss Scarlett!  Miss Melly bad off!"

"The doctor can't come.  Nobody can come.  You've got to bring the
baby and I'll help you."

Prissy's mouth fell open and her tongue wagged wordlessly.  She
looked at Scarlett sideways and scuffed her feet and twisted her
thin body.

"Don't look so simple minded!" cried Scarlett, infuriated at her
silly expression.  "What's the matter?"

Prissy edged back up the stairs.

"Fo' Gawd, Miss Scarlett--"  Fright and shame were in her rolling
eyes.

"Well?"

"Fo' Gawd, Miss Scarlett!  We's got ter have a doctah.  Ah--Ah--
Miss Scarlett, Ah doan know nuthin' 'bout bringin' babies.  Maw
wouldn' nebber lemme be 'round folkses whut wuz havin' dem."

All the breath went out of Scarlett's lungs in one gasp of horror
before rage swept her.  Prissy made a lunge past her, bent on
flight, but Scarlett grabbed her.

"You black liar--what do you mean?  You've been saying you knew
everything about birthing babies.  What is the truth?  Tell me!"
She shook her until the kinky head rocked drunkenly.

"Ah's lyin', Miss Scarlett!  Ah doan know huccome Ah tell sech a
lie.  Ah jes' see one baby birthed, an' Maw she lak ter wo' me out
fer watchin'."

Scarlett glared at her and Prissy shrank back, trying to pull
loose.  For a moment her mind refused to accept the truth, but when
realization finally came to her that Prissy knew no more about
midwifery than she did, anger went over her like a flame.  She had
never struck a slave in all her life, but now she slapped the black
cheek with all the force in her tired arm.  Prissy screamed at the
top of her voice, more from fright than pain, and began to dance up
and down, writhing to break Scarlett's grip.

As she screamed, the moaning from the second floor ceased and a
moment later Melanie's voice, weak and trembling, called:
"Scarlett?  Is it you?  Please come!  Please!"

Scarlett dropped Prissy's arm and the wench sank whimpering to the
steps.  For a moment Scarlett stood still, looking up, listening to
the low moaning which had begun again.  As she stood there, it
seemed as though a yoke descended heavily upon her neck, felt as
though a heavy load were harnessed to it, a load she would feel as
soon as she took a step.

She tried to think of all the things Mammy and Ellen had done for
her when Wade was born but the merciful blurring of the childbirth
pains obscured almost everything in mist.  She did recall a few
things and she spoke to Prissy rapidly, authority in her voice.

"Build a fire in the stove and keep hot water boiling in the
kettle.  And bring up all the towels you can find and that ball of
twine.  And get me the scissors.  Don't come telling me you can't
find them.  Get them and get them quick.  Now hurry."

She jerked Prissy to her feet and sent her kitchenwards with a
shove.  Then she squared her shoulders and started up the stairs.
It was going to be difficult, telling Melanie that she and Prissy
were to deliver her baby.



CHAPTER XXII


There would never again be an afternoon as long as this one.  Or as
hot.  Or as full of lazy insolent flies.  They swarmed on Melanie
despite the fan Scarlett kept in constant motion.  Her arms ached
from swinging the wide palmetto leaf.  All her efforts seemed
futile, for while she brushed them from Melanie's moist face, they
crawled on her clammy feet and legs and made her jerk them weakly
and cry:  "Please!  On my feet!"

The room was in semigloom, for Scarlett had pulled down the shades
to shut out the heat and brightness.  Pin points of sunlight came
in through minute holes in the shades and about the edges.  The
room was an oven and Scarlett's sweat-drenched clothes never dried
but became wetter and stickier as the hours went by.  Prissy was
crouched in a corner, sweating too, and smelled so abominably
Scarlett would have sent her from the room had she not feared the
girl would take to her heels if once out of sight.  Melanie lay on
the bed on a sheet dark with perspiration and splotched with
dampness where Scarlett had spilled water.  She twisted endlessly,
to one side, to the other, to left, to right and back again.

Sometimes she tried to sit up and fell back and began twisting
again.  At first, she had tried to keep from crying out, biting her
lips until they were raw, and Scarlett, whose nerves were as raw as
the lips, said huskily:  "Melly, for God's sake, don't try to be
brave.  Yell if you want to.  There's nobody to hear you but us."

As the afternoon wore on, Melanie moaned whether she wanted to be
brave or not, and sometimes she screamed.  When she did, Scarlett
dropped her head into her hands and covered her ears and twisted
her body and wished that she herself were dead.  Anything was
preferable to being a helpless witness to such pain.  Anything was
better than being tied here waiting for a baby that took such a
long time coming.  Waiting, when for all she knew the Yankees were
actually at Five Points.

She fervently wished she had paid more attention to the whispered
conversations of matrons on the subject of childbirth.  If only she
had!  If only she had been more interested in such matters she'd
know whether Melanie was taking a long time or not.  She had a
vague memory of one of Aunt Pitty's stories of a friend who was in
labor for two days and died without ever having the baby.  Suppose
Melanie should go on like this for two days!  But Melanie was so
delicate.  She couldn't stand two days of this pain.  She'd die
soon if the baby didn't hurry.  And how could she ever face Ashley,
if he were still alive, and tell him that Melanie had died--after
she had promised to take care of her?

At first, Melanie wanted to hold Scarlett's hand when the pain was
bad but she clamped down on it so hard she nearly broke the bones.
After an hour of this, Scarlett's hands were so swollen and bruised
she could hardly flex them.  She knotted two long towels together
and tied them to the foot of the bed and put the knotted end in
Melanie's hands.  Melanie hung onto it as though it were a life
line, straining, pulling it taut, slackening it, tearing it.
Throughout the afternoon, her voice went on like an animal dying in
a trap.  Occasionally she dropped the towel and rubbed her hands
feebly and looked up at Scarlett with eyes enormous with pain.

"Talk to me.  Please talk to me," she whispered and Scarlett would
gabble something until Melanie again gripped the knot and again
began writhing.

The dim room swam with heat and pain and droning flies, and time
went by on such dragging feet Scarlett could scarcely remember the
morning.  She felt as if she had been in this steaming, dark,
sweating place all her life.  She wanted very much to scream every
time Melanie did, and only by biting her lips so hard it infuriated
her could she restrain herself and drive off hysteria.

Once Wade came tiptoeing up the stairs and stood outside the door,
wailing.

"Wade hungwy!"  Scarlett started to go to him, but Melanie
whispered:  "Don't leave me.  Please.  I can stand it when you're
here."

So Scarlett sent Prissy down to warm up the breakfast hominy and
feed him.  For herself, she felt that she could never eat again
after this afternoon.

The clock on the mantel had stopped and she had no way of telling
the time but as the heat in the room lessened and the bright pin
points of light grew duller, she pulled the shade aside.  She saw
to her surprise that it was late afternoon and the sun, a ball of
crimson, was far down the sky.  Somehow, she had imagined it would
remain broiling hot noon forever.

She wondered passionately what was going on downtown.  Had all the
troops moved out yet?  Had the Yankees come?  Would the Confederates
march away without even a fight?  Then she remembered with a sick
dropping in her stomach how few Confederates there were and how many
men Sherman had and how well fed they were.  Sherman!  The name of
Satan himself did not frighten her half so much.  But there was no
time for thinking now, as Melanie called for water, for a cold towel
on her head, to be fanned, to have the flies brushed away from her
face.

When twilight came on and Prissy, scurrying like a black wraith,
lit a lamp, Melanie became weaker.  She began calling for Ashley,
over and over, as if in a delirium until the hideous monotony gave
Scarlett a fierce desire to smother her voice with a pillow.
Perhaps the doctor would come after all.  If he would only come
quickly!  Hope raising its head, she turned to Prissy, and ordered
her to run quickly to the Meades' house and see if he were there or
Mrs. Meade.

"And if he's not there, ask Mrs. Meade or Cookie what to do.  Beg
them to come!"

Prissy was off with a clatter and Scarlett watched her hurrying
down the street, going faster than she had ever dreamed the
worthless child could move.  After a prolonged time she was back,
alone.

"De doctah ain' been home all day.  Sont wud he mout go off wid de
sojers.  Miss Scarlett, Mist' Phil's 'ceased."

"Dead?"

"Yas'm," said Prissy, expanding with importance.  "Talbot, dey
coachman, tole me.  He wuz shot--"

"Never mind that."

"Ah din' see Miss Meade.  Cookie say Miss Meade she washin' him an'
fixin ter buhy him fo' de Yankees gits hyah.  Cookie say effen de
pain get too bad, jes' you put a knife unner Miss Melly's bed an'
it cut de pain in two."

Scarlett wanted to slap her again for this helpful information but
Melanie opened wide, dilated eyes and whispered:  "Dear--are the
Yankees coming?"

"No," said Scarlett stoutly.  "Prissy's a liar."

"Yas'm, Ah sho is," Prissy agreed fervently.

"They're coming," whispered Melanie undeceived and buried her face
in the pillow.  Her voice came out muffled.

"My poor baby.  My poor baby."  And, after a long interval:  "Oh,
Scarlett, you mustn't stay here.  You must go and take Wade."

What Melanie said was no more than Scarlett had been thinking but
hearing it put into words infuriated her, shamed her as if her
secret cowardice was written plainly in her face.

"Don't be a goose.  I'm not afraid.  You know I won't leave you."

"You might as well.  I'm going to die."  And she began moaning
again.



Scarlett came down the dark stairs slowly, like an old woman,
feeling her way, clinging to the banisters lest she fall.  Her legs
were leaden, trembling with fatigue and strain, and she shivered
with cold from the clammy sweat that soaked her body.  Feebly she
made her way onto the front porch and sank down on the top step.
She sprawled back against a pillar of the porch and with a shaking
hand unbuttoned her basque halfway down her bosom.  The night was
drenched in warm soft darkness and she lay staring into it, dull as
an ox.

It was all over.  Melanie was not dead and the small baby boy who
made noises like a young kitten was receiving his first bath at
Prissy's hands.  Melanie was asleep.  How could she sleep after
that nightmare of screaming pain and ignorant midwifery that hurt
more than it helped?  Why wasn't she dead?  Scarlett knew that she
herself would have died under such handling.  But when it was over,
Melanie had even whispered, so weakly she had to bend over her to
hear:  "Thank you."  And then she had gone to sleep.  How could she
go to sleep?  Scarlett forgot that she too had gone to sleep after
Wade was born.  She forgot everything.  Her mind was a vacuum; the
world was a vacuum; there had been no life before this endless day
and there would be none hereafter--only a heavily hot night, only
the sound of her hoarse tired breathing, only the sweat trickling
coldly from armpit to waist, from hip to knee, clammy, sticky,
chilling.

She heard her own breath pass from loud evenness to spasmodic
sobbing but her eyes were dry and burning as though there would
never be tears in them again.  Slowly, laboriously, she heaved
herself over and pulled her heavy skirts up to her thighs.  She was
warm and cold and sticky all at the same time and the feel of the
night air on her limbs was refreshing.  She thought dully what Aunt
Pitty would say, if she could see her sprawled here on the front
porch with her skirts up and her drawers showing, but she did not
care.  She did not care about anything.  Time had stood still.  It
might be just after twilight and it might be midnight.  She didn't
know or care.

She heard sounds of moving feet upstairs and thought "May the Lord
damn Prissy," before her eyes closed and something like sleep
descended upon her.  Then after an indeterminate dark interval,
Prissy was beside her, chattering on in a pleased way.

"We done right good, Miss Scarlett.  Ah specs Maw couldn' a did no
better."

From the shadows, Scarlett glared at her, too tired to rail, too
tired to upbraid, too tired to enumerate Prissy's offenses--her
boastful assumption of experience she didn't possess, her fright,
her blundering awkwardness, her utter inefficiency when the
emergency was hot, the misplacing of the scissors, the spilling of
the basin of water on the bed, the dropping of the new born baby.
And now she bragged about how good she had been.

And the Yankees wanted to free the negroes!  Well, the Yankees were
welcome to them.

She lay back against the pillar in silence and Prissy, aware of her
mood, tiptoed away into the darkness of the porch.  After a long
interval in which her breathing finally quieted and her mind
steadied, Scarlett heard the sound of faint voices from up the
road, the tramping of many feet coming from the north.  Soldiers!
She sat up slowly, pulling down her skirts, although she knew no
one could see her in the darkness.  As they came abreast the house,
an indeterminate number, passing like shadows, she called to them.

"Oh, please!"

A shadow disengaged itself from the mass and came to the gate.

"Are you going?  Are you leaving us?"

The shadow seemed to take off a hat and a quiet voice came from the
darkness.

"Yes, Ma'm.  That's what we're doing.  We're the last of the men
from the breastworks, 'bout a mile north from here."

"Are you--is the army really retreating?"

"Yes, Ma'm.  You see, the Yankees are coming."

The Yankees are coming!  She had forgotten that.  Her throat
suddenly contracted and she could say nothing more.  The shadow
moved away, merged itself with the other shadows and the feet
tramped off into the darkness.  "The Yankees are coming!  The
Yankees are coming!"  That was what the rhythm of their feet said,
that was what her suddenly bumping heart thudded out with each
beat.  The Yankees are coming!

"De Yankees is comin'!" bawled Prissy, shrinking close to her.
"Oh, Miss Scarlett, dey'll kill us all!  Dey'll run dey baynits in
our stummicks!  Dey'll--"

"Oh, hush!"  It was terrifying enough to think these things without
hearing them put into trembling words.  Renewed fear swept her.
What could she do?  How could she escape?  Where could she turn for
help?  Every friend had failed her.

Suddenly she thought of Rhett Butler and calm dispelled her fears.
Why hadn't she thought of him this morning when she had been
tearing about like a chicken with its head off?  She hated him, but
he was strong and smart and he wasn't afraid of the Yankees.  And
he was still in town.  Of course, she was mad at him.  But she
could overlook such things at a time like this.  And he had a horse
and carriage, too.  Oh, why hadn't she thought of him before!  He
could take them all away from this doomed place, away from the
Yankees, somewhere, anywhere.

She turned to Prissy and spoke with feverish urgency.

"You know where Captain Butler lives--at the Atlanta Hotel?"

"Yas'm, but--"

"Well, go there, now, as quick as you can run and tell him I want
him.  I want him to come quickly and bring his horse and carriage
or an ambulance if he can get one.  Tell him about the baby.  Tell
him I want him to take us out of here.  Go, now.  Hurry!"

She sat upright and gave Prissy a push to speed her feet.

"Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett!  Ah's sceered ter go runnin' roun' in
de dahk by mahseff!  Spose de Yankees gits me?"

"If you run fast you can catch up with those soldiers and they
won't let the Yankees get you.  Hurry!"

"Ah's sceered!  Sposin' Cap'n Butler ain' at de hotel?"

"Then ask where he is.  Haven't you any gumption?  If he isn't at
the hotel, go to the barrooms on Decatur Street and ask for him.
Go to Belle Watling's house.  Hunt for him.  You fool, don't you
see that if you don't hurry and find him the Yankees will surely
get us all?"

"Miss Scarlett, Maw would weah me out wid a cotton stalk, did Ah go
in a bahroom or a ho' house."

Scarlett pulled herself to her feet.

"Well, I'll wear you out if you don't.  You can stand outside in
the street and yell for him, can't you?  Or ask somebody if he's
inside.  Get going."

When Prissy still lingered, shuffling her feet and mouthing,
Scarlett gave her another push which nearly sent her headlong down
the front steps.

"You'll go or I'll sell you down the river.  You'll never see your
mother again or anybody you know and I'll sell you for a field hand
too.  Hurry!"

"Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett--"

But under the determined pressure of her mistress' hand she started
down the steps.  The front gate clicked and Scarlett cried:  "Run,
you goose!"

She heard the patter of Prissy's feet as she broke into a trot, and
then the sound died away on the soft earth.



CHAPTER XXIII


After Prissy had gone, Scarlett went wearily into the downstairs
hall and lit a lamp.  The house felt steamingly hot, as though it
held in its walls all the heat of the noontide.  Some of her
dullness was passing now and her stomach was clamoring for food.
She remembered she had had nothing to eat since the night before
except a spoonful of hominy, and picking up the lamp she went into
the kitchen.  The fire in the oven had died but the room was
stifling hot.  She found half a pone of hard corn bread in the
skillet and gnawed hungrily on it while she looked about for other
food.  There was some hominy left in the pot and she ate it with a
big cooking spoon, not waiting to put it on a plate.  It needed
salt badly but she was too hungry to hunt for it.  After four
spoonfuls of it, the heat of the room was too much and, taking the
lamp in one hand and a fragment of pone in the other, she went out
into the hall.

She knew she should go upstairs and sit beside Melanie.  If
anything went wrong, Melanie would be too weak to call.  But the
idea of returning to that room where she had spent so many
nightmare hours was repulsive to her.  Even if Melanie were dying,
she couldn't go back up there.  She never wanted to see that room
again.  She set the lamp on the candle stand by the window and
returned to the front porch.  It was so much cooler here, and even
the night was drowned in soft warmth.  She sat down on the steps in
the circle of faint light thrown by the lamp and continued gnawing
on the corn bread.

When she had finished it, a measure of strength came back to her
and with the strength came again the pricking of fear.  She could
hear a humming of noise far down the street, but what it portended
she did not know.  She could distinguish nothing but a volume of
sound that rose and fell.  She strained forward trying to hear and
soon she found her muscles aching from the tension.  More than
anything in the world she yearned to hear the sound of hooves and
to see Rhett's careless, self-confident eyes laughing at her fears.
Rhett would take them away, somewhere.  She didn't know where.  She
didn't care.

As she sat straining her ears toward town, a faint glow appeared
above the trees.  It puzzled her.  She watched it and saw it grow
brighter.  The dark sky became pink and then dull red, and suddenly
above the trees, she saw a huge tongue of flame leap high to the
heavens.  She jumped to her feet, her heart beginning again its
sickening thudding and bumping.

The Yankees had come!  She knew they had come and they were burning
the town.  The flames seemed to be off to the east of the center of
town.  They shot higher and higher and widened rapidly into a broad
expanse of red before her terrified eyes.  A whole block must be
burning.  A faint hot breeze that had sprung up bore the smell of
smoke to her.

She fled up the stairs to her own room and hung out the window for
a better view.  The sky was a hideous lurid color and great swirls
of black smoke went twisting up to hand in billowy clouds above the
flames.  The smell of smoke was stronger now.  Her mind rushed
incoherently here and there, thinking how soon the flames would
spread up Peachtree Street and burn this house, how soon the
Yankees would be rushing in upon her, where she would run, what she
would do.  All the fiends of hell seemed screaming in her ears and
her brain swirled with confusion and panic so overpowering she
clung to the window sill for support.

"I must think," she told herself over and over.  "I must think."

But thoughts eluded her, darting in and out of her mind like
frightened humming birds.  As she stood hanging to the sill, a
deafening explosion burst on her ears, louder than any cannon she
had ever heard.  The sky was rent with gigantic flame.  Then other
explosions.  The earth shook and the glass in the panes above her
head shivered and came down around her.

The world became an inferno of noise and flame and trembling earth
as one explosion followed another in earsplitting succession.
Torrents of sparks shot to the sky and descended slowly, lazily,
through blood-colored clouds of smoke.  She thought she heard a
feeble call from the next room but she paid it no heed.  She had no
time for Melanie now.  No time for anything except a fear that
licked through her veins as swiftly as the flames she saw.  She was
a child and mad with fright and she wanted to bury her head in her
mother's lap and shut out this sight.  If she were only home!  Home
with Mother.

Through the nerve-shivering sounds, she heard another sound, that
of fear-sped feet coming up the stairs three at a time, heard a
voice yelping like a lost hound.  Prissy broke into the room and,
flying to Scarlett, clutched her arm in a grip that seemed to pinch
out pieces of flesh.

"The Yankees--" cried Scarlett.

"No'm, its our gempmums!" yelled Prissy between breaths, digging
her nails deeper into Scarlett's arm.  "Dey's buhnin' de foun'ry
an' de ahmy supply depots an' de wa'houses an', fo' Gawd, Miss
Scarlett, dey done set off dem sebenty freight cahs of cannon balls
an' gunpowder an', Jesus, we's all gwine ter buhn up!"

She began yelping again shrilly and pinched Scarlett so hard she
cried out in pain and fury and shook off her hand.

The Yankees hadn't come yet!  There was still time to get away!
She rallied her frightened forces together.

"If I don't get a hold on myself," she thought, "I'll be squalling
like a scalded cat!" and the sight of Prissy's abject terror helped
steady her.  She took her by the shoulders and shook her.

"Shut up that racket and talk sense.  The Yankees haven't come, you
fool!  Did you see Captain Butler?  What did he say?  Is he
coming?"

Prissy ceased her yelling but her teeth chattered.

"Yas'm, ah finely foun' him.  In a bahroom, lak you told me.  He--"

"Never mind where you found him.  Is he coming?  Did you tell him
to bring his horse?"

"Lawd, Miss Scarlett, he say our gempmums done tuck his hawse an'
cah'ige fer a amberlance."

"Dear God in Heaven!"

"But he comin'--"

"What did he say?"

Prissy had recovered her breath and a small measure of control but
her eyes still rolled.

"Well'm, lak you tole me, Ah foun' him in a bahroom.  Ah stood
outside an' yell fer him an' he come out.  An' terreckly he see me
an' Ah starts tell him, de sojers tech off a sto' house down
Decatur Street an' it flame up an' he say Come on an' he grab me
an' we runs ter Fibe Points an' he say den:  What now?  Talk fas'.
An' Ah say you say, Cap'n Butler, come quick an' bring yo' hawse
an' cah'ige.  Miss Melly done had a chile an' you is bustin' ter
get outer town.  An' he say:  Where all she studyin' 'bout goin'?
An' Ah say:  Ah doan know, suh, but you is boun' ter go fo' de
Yankees gits hyah an' wants him ter go wid you.  An' he laugh an'
say dey done tuck his hawse."

Scarlett's heart went leaden as the last hope left her.  Fool that
she was, why hadn't she thought that the retreating army would
naturally take every vehicle and animal left in the city?  For a
moment she was too stunned to hear what Prissy was saying but she
pulled herself together to hear the rest of the story.

"An' den he say, Tell Miss Scarlett ter res' easy.  Ah'll steal her
a hawse outer de ahmy crall effen dey's ary one lef.  An' he say,
Ah done stole hawses befo' dis night.  Tell her Ah git her a hawse
effen Ah gits shot fer it.  Den he laugh agin an' say, Cut an' run
home.  An' befo' Ah gits started Ker-bboom!  Off goes a noise an'
Ah lak ter drap in mah tracks an' he tell me twain't nuthin' but de
ammernition our gempmums blown' up so's de Yankees don't git it
an'--"

"He is coming?  He's going to bring a horse?"

"So he say."

She drew a long breath of relief.  If there was any way of getting
a horse, Rhett Butler would get one.  A smart man, Rhett.  She
would forgive him anything if he got them out of this mess.
Escape!  And with Rhett she would have no fear.  Rhett would
protect them.  Thank God for Rhett!  With safety in view she turned
practical.

"Wake Wade up and dress him and pack some clothes for all of us.
Put them in the small trunk.  And don't tell Miss Mellie we're
going.  Not yet.  But wrap the baby in a couple of thick towels and
be sure and pack his clothes."

Prissy still clung to her skirts and hardly anything showed in her
eyes except the whites.  Scarlett gave her a shove and loosened her
grip.

"Hurry," she cried, and Prissy went off like a rabbit.

Scarlett knew she should go in and quiet Melanie's fear, knew
Melanie must be frightened out of her senses by the thunderous
noises that continued unabated and the glare that lighted the sky.
It looked and sounded like the end of the world.

But she could not bring herself to go back into that room just yet.
She ran down the stairs with some idea of packing up Miss
Pittypat's china and the little silver she had left when she
refugeed to Macon.  But when she reached the dining room, her hands
were shaking so badly she dropped three plates and shattered them.
She ran out onto the porch to listen and back again to the dining
room and dropped the silver clattering to the floor.  Everything
she touched she dropped.  In her hurry she slipped on the rag rug
and fell to the floor with a jolt but leaped up so quickly she was
not even aware of the pain.  Upstairs she could hear Prissy
galloping about like a wild animal and the sound maddened her, for
she was galloping just as aimlessly.

For the dozenth time, she ran out onto the porch but this time she
did not go back to her futile packing.  She sat down.  It was just
impossible to pack anything.  Impossible to do anything but sit
with hammering heart and wait for Rhett.  It seemed hours before he
came.  At last, far up the road, she heard the protesting screech
of unoiled axles and the slow uncertain plodding of hooves.  Why
didn't he hurry?  Why didn't he make the horse trot?

The sounds came nearer and she leaped to her feet and called
Rhett's name.  Then, she saw him dimly as he climbed down from the
seat of a small wagon, heard the clicking of the gate as he came
toward her.  He came into view and the light of the lamp showed him
plainly.  His dress was as debonaire as if he were going to a ball,
well-tailored white linen coat and trousers, embroidered gray
watered-silk waistcoat and a hint of ruffle on his shirt bosom.
His wide Panama hat was set dashingly on one side of his head and
in the belt of his trousers were thrust two ivory-handled, long-
barreled dueling pistols.  The pockets of his coat sagged heavily
with ammunition.

He came up the walk with the springy stride of a savage and his
fine head was carried like a pagan prince.  The dangers of the
night which had driven Scarlett into panic had affected him like an
intoxicant.  There was a carefully restrained ferocity in his dark
face, a ruthlessness which would have frightened her had she the
wits to see it.

His black eyes danced as though amused by the whole affair, as
though the earth-splitting sounds and the horrid glare were merely
things to frighten children.  She swayed toward him as he came up
the steps, her face white, her green eyes burning.

"Good evening," he said, in his drawling voice, as he removed his
hat with a sweeping gesture.  "Fine weather we're having.  I hear
you're going to take a trip."

"If you make any jokes, I shall never speak to you again," she said
with quivering voice.

"Don't tell me you are frightened!"  He pretended to be surprised
and smiled in a way that made her long to push him backwards down
the steep steps.

"Yes, I am!  I'm frightened to death and if you had the sense God
gave a goat, you'd be frightened too.  But we haven't got time to
talk.  We must get out of here."

"At your service, Madam.  But just where were you figuring on
going?  I made the trip out here for curiosity, just to see where
you were intending to go.  You can't go north or east or south or
west.  The Yankees are all around.  There's just one road out of
town which the Yankees haven't got yet and the army is retreating
by that road.  And that road won't be open long.  General Steve
Lee's cavalry is fighting a rear-guard action at Rough and Ready to
hold it open long enough for the army to get away.  If you follow
the army down the McDonough road, they'll take the horse away from
you and, while it's not much of a horse, I did go to a lot of
trouble stealing it.  Just where are you going?"

She stood shaking, listening to his words, hardly hearing them.
But, at his question she suddenly knew where she was going, knew
that all this miserable day she had known where she was going.  The
only place.

"I'm going home," she said.

"Home?  You mean to Tara?"

"Yes, yes!  To Tara!  Oh, Rhett, we must hurry!"

He looked at her as if she had lost her mind.

"Tara?  God Almighty, Scarlett!  Don't you know they fought all day
at Jonesboro?  Fought for ten miles up and down the road from Rough
and Ready even into the streets of Jonesboro?  The Yankees may be
all over Tara by now, all over the County.  Nobody knows where they
are but they're in that neighborhood.  You can't go home!  You
can't go right through the Yankee army!"

"I will go home!" she cried.  "I will!  I will!"

"You little fool," and his voice was swift and rough.  "You can't
go that way.  Even if you didn't run into the Yankees, the woods
are full of stragglers and deserters from both armies.  And lots of
our troops are still retreating from Jonesboro.  They'd take the
horse away from you as quickly as the Yankees would.  Your only
chance is to follow the troops down the McDonough road and pray
that they won't see you in the dark.  You can't go to Tara.  Even
if you got there, you'd probably find it burned down.  I won't let
you go home.  It's insanity."

"I will go home!" she cried and her voice broke and rose to a
scream.  "I will go home!  You can't stop me!  I will go home!  I
want my mother!  I'll kill you if you try to stop me!  I will go
home!"

Tears of fright and hysteria streamed down her face as she finally
gave way under the long strain.  She beat on his chest with her
fists and screamed again:  "I will!  I will!  If I have to walk
every step of the way!"

Suddenly she was in his arms, her wet cheek against the starched
ruffle of his shirt, her beating hands stilled against him.  His
hands caressed her tumbled hair gently, soothingly, and his voice
was gentle too.  So gentle, so quiet, so devoid of mockery, it did
not seem Rhett Butler's voice at all but the voice of some kind
strong stranger who smelled of brandy and tobacco and horses,
comforting smells because they reminded her of Gerald.

"There, there, darling," he said softly.  "Don't cry.  You shall go
home, my brave little girl.  You shall go home.  Don't cry."

She felt something brush her hair and wondered vaguely through her
tumult if it were his lips.  He was so tender, so infinitely
soothing, she longed to stay in his arms forever.  With such strong
arms about her, surely nothing could harm her.

He fumbled in his pocket and produced a handkerchief and wiped her
eyes.

"Now, blow your nose like a good child," he ordered, a glint of a
smile in his eyes, "and tell me what to do.  We must work fast."

She blew her nose obediently, still trembling, but she could not
think what to tell him to do.  Seeing how her lip quivered and her
eyes looked up at him helplessly, he took command.

"Mrs. Wilkes has had her child?  It will be dangerous to move her--
dangerous to drive her twenty-five miles in that rickety wagon.
We'd better leave her with Mrs. Meade."

"The Meades aren't home.  I can't leave her."

"Very well.  Into the wagon she goes.  Where is that simple-minded
little wench?"

"Upstairs packing the trunk."

"Trunk?  You can't take any trunk in that wagon.  It's almost too
small to hold all of you and the wheels are ready to come off with
no encouragement.  Call her and tell her to get the smallest
feather bed in the house and put it in the wagon."

Still Scarlett could not move.  He took her arm in a strong grasp
and some of the vitality which animated him seemed to flow into her
body.  If only she could be as cool and casual as he was!  He
propelled her into the hall but she still stood helplessly looking
at him.  His lip went down mockingly:  "Can this be the heroic
young woman who assured me she feared neither God nor man?"

He suddenly burst into laughter and dropped her arm.  Stung, she
glared at him, hating him.

"I'm not afraid," she said.

"Yes, you are.  In another moment you'll be in a swoon and I have
no smelling salts about me."

She stamped her foot impotently because she could not think of
anything else to do--and without a word picked up the lamp and
started up the stairs.  He was close behind her and she could hear
him laughing softly to himself.  That sound stiffened her spine.
She went into Wade's nursery and found him sitting clutched in
Prissy's arms, half dressed, hiccoughing quietly.  Prissy was
whimpering.  The feather tick on Wade's bed was small and she
ordered Prissy to drag it down the stairs and into the wagon.
Prissy put down the child and obeyed.  Wade followed her down the
stairs, his hiccoughs stilled by his interest in the proceedings.

"Come," said Scarlett, turning to Melanie's door and Rhett followed
her, hat in hand.

Melanie lay quietly with the sheet up to her chin.  Her face was
deathly white but her eyes, sunken and black circled, were serene.
She showed no surprise at the sight of Rhett in her bedroom but
seemed to take it as a matter of course.  She tried to smile weakly
but the smile died before it reached the corners of her mouth.

"We are going home, to Tara," Scarlett explained rapidly.  "The
Yankees are coming.  Rhett is going to take us.  It's the only way,
Melly."

Melanie tried to nod her head feebly and gestured toward the baby.
Scarlett picked up the small baby and wrapped him hastily in a
thick towel.  Rhett stepped to the bed.

"I'll try not to hurt you," he said quietly, tucking the sheet
about her.  "See if you can put your arms around my neck."

Melanie tried but they fell back weakly.  He bent, slipped an arm
under her shoulders and another across her knees and lifted her
gently.  She did not cry out but Scarlett saw her bite her lip and
go even whiter.  Scarlett held the lamp high for Rhett to see and
started toward the door when Melanie made a feeble gesture toward
the wall.

"What is it?" Rhett asked softly.

"Please," Melanie whispered, trying to point.  "Charles."

Rhett looked down at her as if he thought her delirious but
Scarlett understood and was irritated.  She knew Melanie wanted the
daguerreotype of Charles which hung on the wall below his sword and
pistol.

"Please," Melanie whispered again, "the sword."

"Oh, all right," said Scarlett and, after she had lighted Rhett's
careful way down the steps, she went back and unhooked the sword
and pistol belts.  It would be awkward, carrying them as well as
the baby and the lamp.  That was just like Melanie, not to be at
all bothered over nearly dying and having the Yankees at her heels
but to worry about Charles' things.

As she took down the daguerreotype, she caught a glimpse of
Charles' face.  His large brown eyes met hers and she stopped for a
moment to look at the picture curiously.  This man had been her
husband, had lain beside her for a few nights, had given her a
child with eyes as soft and brown as his.  And she could hardly
remember him.

The child in her arms waved small fists and mewed softly and she
looked down at him.  For the first time, she realized that this was
Ashley's baby and suddenly wished with all the strength left in her
that he were her baby, hers and Ashley's.

Prissy came bounding up the stairs and Scarlett handed the child to
her.  They went hastily down, the lamp throwing uncertain shadows
on the wall.  In the hall, Scarlett saw a bonnet and put it on
hurriedly, tying the ribbons under her chin.  It was Melanie's
black mourning bonnet and it did not fit Scarlett's head but she
could not recall where she had put her own bonnet.

She went out of the house and down the front steps, carrying the
lamp and trying to keep the saber from banging against her legs.
Melanie lay full length in the back of the wagon, and, beside her,
were Wade and the towel-swathed baby.  Prissy climbed in and took
the baby in her arms.

The wagon was very small and the boards about the sides very low.
The wheels leaned inward as if their first revolution would make
them come off.  She took one look at the horse and her heart sank.
He was a small emaciated animal and he stood with his head
dispiritedly low, almost between his forelegs.  His back was raw
with sores and harness galls and he breathed as no sound horse
should.

"Not much of an animal, is it?" grinned Rhett.  "Looks like he'll
die in the shafts.  But he's the best I could do.  Some day I'll
tell you with embellishments just where and how I stole him and how
narrowly I missed getting shot.  Nothing but my devotion to you
would make me, at this stage of my career, turn horse thief--and
thief of such a horse.  Let me help you in."

He took the lamp from her and set it on the ground.  The front seat
was only a narrow plank across the sides of the wagon.  Rhett
picked Scarlett up bodily and swung her to it.  How wonderful to be
a man and as strong as Rhett, she thought, tucking her wide skirts
about her.  With Rhett beside her, she did not fear anything,
neither the fire nor the noise nor the Yankees.

He climbed onto the seat beside her and picked up the reins.

"Oh, wait!" she cried.  "I forgot to lock the front door."

He burst into a roar of laughter and slapped the reins upon the
horse's back.

"What are you laughing at?"

"At you--locking the Yankees out," he said and the horse started
off, slowly, reluctantly.  The lamp on the sidewalk burned on,
making a tiny yellow circle of light which grew smaller and smaller
as they moved away.



Rhett turned the horse's slow feet westward from Peachtree and the
wobbling wagon jounced into the rutty lane with a violence that
wrenched an abruptly stifled moan from Melanie.  Dark trees
interlaced above their heads, dark silent houses loomed up on
either side and the white palings of fences gleamed faintly like a
row of tombstones.  The narrow street was a dim tunnel, but faintly
through the thick leafy ceiling the hideous red glow of the sky
penetrated and shadows chased one another down the dark way like
mad ghosts.  The smell of smoke came stronger and stronger, and on
the wings of the hot breeze came a pandemonium of sound from the
center of town, yells, the dull rumbling of heavy army wagons and
the steady tramp of marching feet.  As Rhett jerked the horse's
head and turned him into another street, another deafening
explosion tore the air and a monstrous skyrocket of flame and smoke
shot up in the west.

"That must be the last of the ammunition trains," Rhett said
calmly.  "Why didn't they get them out this morning, the fools!
There was plenty of time.  Well, too bad for us.  I thought by
circling around the center of town, we might avoid the fire and
that drunken mob on Decatur Street and get through to the southwest
part of town without any danger.  But we've got to cross Marietta
Street somewhere and that explosion was near Marietta Street or I
miss my guess."

"Must--must we go through the fire?" Scarlett quavered.

"Not if we hurry," said Rhett and, springing from the wagon, he
disappeared into the darkness of a yard.  When he returned he had a
small limb of a tree in his hand and he laid it mercilessly across
the horse's galled back.  The animal broke into a shambling trot,
his breath panting and labored, and the wagon swayed forward with a
jolt that threw them about like popcorn in a popper.  The baby
wailed, and Prissy and Wade cried out as they bruised themselves
against the sides of the wagon.  But from Melanie there was no
sound.

As they neared Marietta Street, the trees thinned out and the tall
flames roaring up above the buildings threw street and houses into
a glare of light brighter than day, casting monstrous shadows that
twisted as wildly as torn sails flapping in a gale on a sinking
ship.

Scarlett's teeth chattered but so great was her terror she was not
even aware of it.  She was cold and she shivered, even though the
heat of the flames was already hot against their faces.  This was
hell and she was in it and, if she could only have conquered her
shaking knees, she would have leaped from the wagon and run
screaming back the dark road they had come, back to the refuge of
Miss Pittypat's house.  She shrank closer to Rhett, took his arm in
fingers that trembled and looked up at him for words, for comfort,
for something reassuring.  In the unholy crimson glow that bathed
them, his dark profile stood out as clearly as the head on an
ancient coin, beautiful, cruel and decadent.  At her touch he
turned to her, his eyes gleaming with a light as frightening as the
fire.  To Scarlett, he seemed as exhilarated and contemptuous as if
he got strong pleasure from the situation, as if he welcomed the
inferno they were approaching.

"Here," he said, laying a hand on one of the long-barreled pistols
in his belt.  "If anyone, black or white, comes up on your side of
the wagon and tries to lay hand on the horse, shoot him and we'll
ask questions later.  But for God's sake, don't shoot the nag in
your excitement."

"I--I have a pistol," she whispered, clutching the weapon in her
lap, perfectly certain that if death stared her in the face, she
would be too frightened to pull the trigger.

"You have?  Where did you get it?"

"It's Charles'."

"Charles?"

"Yes, Charles--my husband."

"Did you ever really have a husband, my dear?" he whispered and
laughed softly.

If he would only be serious!  If he would only hurry!

"How do you suppose I got my boy?" she cried fiercely.

"Oh, there are other ways than husbands--"

"Will you hush and hurry?"

But he drew rein abruptly, almost at Marietta Street, in the shadow
of a warehouse not yet touched by the flames.

"Hurry!"  It was the only word in her mind.  Hurry!  Hurry!

"Soldiers," he said.

The detachment came down Marietta Street, between the burning
buildings, walking at route step, tiredly, rifles held any way,
heads down, too weary to hurry, too weary to care if timbers were
crashing to right and left and smoke billowing about them.  They
were all ragged, so ragged that between officers and men there were
no distinguishing insignia except here and there a torn hat brim
pinned up with a wreathed "C.S.A."  Many were barefooted and here
and there a dirty bandage wrapped a head or arm.  They went past,
looking neither to left nor right, so silent that had it not been
for the steady tramp of feet they might all have been ghosts.

"Take a good look at them," came Rhett's gibing voice, "so you can
tell your grandchildren you saw the rear guard of the Glorious
Cause in retreat."

Suddenly she hated him, hated him with a strength that momentarily
overpowered her fear, made it seem petty and small.  She knew her
safety and that of the others in the back of the wagon depended on
him and him alone, but she hated him for his sneering at those
ragged ranks.  She thought of Charles who was dead and Ashley who
might be dead and all the gay and gallant young men who were
rotting in shallow graves and she forgot that she, too, had once
thought them fools.  She could not speak, but hatred and disgust
burned in her eyes as she stared at him fiercely.

As the last of the soldiers were passing, a small figure in the
rear rank, his rifle butt dragging the ground, wavered, stopped and
stared after the others with a dirty face so dulled by fatigue he
looked like a sleepwalker.  He was as small as Scarlett, so small
his rifle was almost as tall as he was, and his grime-smeared face
was unbearded.  Sixteen at the most, thought Scarlett irrelevantly,
must be one of the Home Guard or a runaway schoolboy.

As she watched, the boy's knees buckled slowly and he went down in
the dust.  Without a word, two men fell out of the last rank and
walked back to him.  One, a tall spare man with a black beard that
hung to his belt, silently handed his own rifle and that of the boy
to the other.  Then, stooping, he jerked the boy to his shoulders
with an ease that looked like sleight of hand.  He started off
slowly after the retreating column, his shoulders bowed under the
weight, while the boy, weak, infuriated like a child teased by its
elders, screamed out:  "Put me down, damn you!  Put me down!  I can
walk!"

The bearded man said nothing and plodded on out of sight around the
bend of the road.

Rhett sat still, the reins lax in his hands, looking after them, a
curious moody look on his swarthy face.  Then, there was a crash of
falling timbers near by and Scarlett saw a thin tongue of flame
lick up over the roof of the warehouse in whose sheltering shadow
they sat.  Then pennons and battle flags of flame flared
triumphantly to the sky above them.  Smoke burnt her nostrils and
Wade and Prissy began coughing.  The baby made soft sneezing
sounds.

"Oh, name of God, Rhett!  Are you crazy?  Hurry!  Hurry!"

Rhett made no reply but brought the tree limb down on the horse's
back with a cruel force that made the animal leap forward.  With
all the speed the horse could summon, they jolted and bounced
across Marietta Street.  Ahead of them was a tunnel of fire where
buildings were blazing on either side of the short, narrow street
that led down to the railroad tracks.  They plunged into it.  A
glare brighter than a dozen suns dazzled their eyes, scorching heat
seared their skins and the roaring, cracking and crashing beat upon
their ears in painful waves.  For an eternity, it seemed, they were
in the midst of flaming torment and then abruptly they were in
semidarkness again.

As they dashed down the street and bumped over the railroad tracks,
Rhett applied the whip automatically.  His face looked set and
absent, as though he had forgotten where he was.  His broad
shoulders were hunched forward and his chin jutted out as though
the thoughts in his mind were not pleasant.  The heat of the fire
made sweat stream down his forehead and cheeks but he did not wipe
it off.

They pulled into a side street, then another, then turned and
twisted from one narrow street to another until Scarlett completely
lost her bearings and the roaring of the flames died behind them.
Still Rhett did not speak.  He only laid on the whip with
regularity.  The red glow in the sky was fading now and the road
became so dark, so frightening, Scarlett would have welcomed words,
any words from him, even jeering, insulting words, words that cut.
But he did not speak.

Silent or not, she thanked Heaven for the comfort of his presence.
It was so good to have a man beside her, to lean close to him and
feel the hard swell of his arm and know that he stood between her
and unnamable terrors, even though he merely sat there and stared.

"Oh, Rhett," she whispered clasping his arm, "What would we ever
have done without you?  I'm so glad you aren't in the army!"

He turned his head and gave her one look, a look that made her drop
his arm and shrink back.  There was no mockery in his eyes now.
They were naked and there was anger and something like bewilderment
in them.  His lip curled down and he turned his head away.  For a
long time they jounced along in a silence unbroken except for the
faint wails of the baby and sniffles from Prissy.  When she was
able to bear the sniffling noise no longer, Scarlett turned and
pinched her viciously, causing Prissy to scream in good earnest
before she relapsed into frightened silence.

Finally Rhett turned the horse at right angles and after a while
they were on a wider, smoother road.  The dim shapes of houses grew
farther and farther apart and unbroken woods loomed wall-like on
either side.

"We're out of town now," said Rhett briefly, drawing rein, "and on
the main road to Rough and Ready."

"Hurry.  Don't stop!"

"Let the animal breathe a bit."  Then turning to her, he asked
slowly:  "Scarlett, are you still determined to do this crazy
thing?"

"Do what?"

"Do you still want to try to get through to Tara?  It's suicidal.
Steve Lee's cavalry and the Yankee Army are between you and Tara."

Oh, Dear God!  Was he going to refuse to take her home, after all
she'd gone through this terrible day?

"Oh, yes!  Yes!  Please, Rhett, let's hurry.  The horse isn't
tired."

"Just a minute.  You can't go down to Jonesboro on this road.  You
can't follow the train tracks.  They've been fighting up and down
there all day from Rough and Ready on south.  Do you know any other
roads, small wagon roads or lanes that don't go through Rough and
Ready or Jonesboro?"

"Oh, yes," cried Scarlett in relief.  "If we can just get near to
Rough and Ready, I know a wagon trace that winds off from the main
Jonesboro road and wanders around for miles.  Pa and I used to ride
it.  It comes out right near the MacIntosh place and that's only a
mile from Tara."

"Good.  Maybe you can get past Rough and Ready all right.  General
Steve Lee was there during the afternoon covering the retreat.
Maybe the Yankees aren't there yet.  Maybe you can get through
there, if Steve Lee's men don't pick up your horse."

"_I_ can get through?"

"Yes, YOU."  His voice was rough.

"But Rhett--  You--  Aren't going to take us?"

"No.  I'm leaving you here."

She looked around wildly, at the livid sky behind them, at the dark
trees on either hand hemming them in like a prison wall, at the
frightened figures in the back of the wagon--and finally at him.
Had she gone crazy?  Was she not hearing right?

He was grinning now.  She could just see his white teeth in the
faint light and the old mockery was back in his eyes.

"Leaving us?  Where--where are you going?"

"I am going, dear girl, with the army."

She sighed with relief and irritation.  Why did he joke at this
time of all times?  Rhett in the army!  After all he'd said about
stupid fools who were enticed into losing their lives by a roll of
drums and brave words from orators--fools who killed themselves
that wise men might make money!

"Oh, I could choke you for scaring me so!  Let's get on."

"I'm not joking, my dear.  And I am hurt, Scarlett, that you do not
take my gallant sacrifice with better spirit.  Where is your
patriotism, your love for Our Glorious Cause?  Now is your chance
to tell me to return with my shield or on it.  But, talk fast, for
I want time to make a brave speech before departing for the wars."

His drawling voice gibed in her ears.  He was jeering at her and,
somehow, she knew he was jeering at himself too.  What was he
talking about?  Patriotism, shields, brave speeches?  It wasn't
possible that he meant what he was saying.  It just wasn't
believable that he could talk so blithely of leaving her here on
this dark road with a woman who might be dying, a new-born infant,
a foolish black wench and a frightened child, leaving her to pilot
them through miles of battle fields and stragglers and Yankees and
fire and God knows what.

Once, when she was six years old, she had fallen from a tree, flat
on her stomach.  She could still recall that sickening interval
before breath came back into her body.  Now, as she looked at
Rhett, she felt the same way she had felt then, breathless,
stunned, nauseated.

"Rhett, you are joking!"

She grabbed his arm and felt her tears of fright splash down her
wrist.  He raised her hand and kissed it arily.

"Selfish to the end, aren't you, my dear?  Thinking only of your
own precious hide and not of the gallant Confederacy.  Think how
our troops will be heartened by my eleventh-hour appearance."
There was a malicious tenderness in his voice.

"Oh, Rhett," she wailed, "how can you do this to me?  Why are you
leaving me?"

"Why?" he laughed jauntily.  "Because, perhaps, of the betraying
sentimentality that lurks in all of us Southerners.  Perhaps--
perhaps because I am ashamed.  Who knows?"

"Ashamed?  You should die of shame.  To desert us here, alone,
helpless--"

"Dear Scarlett!  You aren't helpless.  Anyone as selfish and
determined as you are is never helpless.  God help the Yankees if
they should get you."

He stepped abruptly down from the wagon and, as she watched him,
stunned with bewilderment, he came around to her side of the wagon.

"Get out," he ordered.

She stared at him.  He reached up roughly, caught her under the
arms and swung her to the ground beside him.  With a tight grip on
her he dragged her several paces away from the wagon.  She felt the
dust and gravel in her slippers hurting her feet.  The still hot
darkness wrapped her like a dream.

"I'm not asking you to understand or forgive.  I don't give a damn
whether you do either, for I shall never understand or forgive
myself for this idiocy.  I am annoyed at myself to find that so
much quixoticism still lingers in me.  But our fair Southland needs
every man.  Didn't our brave Governor Brown say just that?  Not
matter.  I'm off to the wars."  He laughed suddenly, a ringing,
free laugh that startled the echoes in the dark woods.

"'I could not love thee, Dear, so much, loved I not Honour more.'
That's a pat speech, isn't it?  Certainly better than anything I
can think up myself, at the present moment.  For I do love you,
Scarlett, in spite of what I said that night on the porch last
month."

His drawl was caressing and his hands slid up her bare arms, warm
strong hands.  "I love you, Scarlett, because we are so much alike,
renegades, both of us, dear, and selfish rascals.  Neither of us
cares a rap if the whole world goes to pot, so long as we are safe
and comfortable."

His voice went on in the darkness and she heard words, but they
made no sense to her.  Her mind was tiredly trying to take in the
harsh truth that he was leaving her here to face the Yankees alone.
Her mind said:  "He's leaving me.  He's leaving me."  But no
emotion stirred.

Then his arms went around her waist and shoulders and she felt the
hard muscles of his thighs against her body and the buttons of his
coat pressing into her breast.  A warm tide of feeling, bewildering,
frightening, swept over her, carrying out of her mind the time and
place and circumstances.  She felt as limp as a rag doll, warm, weak
and helpless, and his supporting arms were so pleasant.

"You don't want to change your mind about what I said last month?
There's nothing like danger and death to give an added fillip.  Be
patriotic, Scarlett.  Think how you would be sending a soldier to
his death with beautiful memories."

He was kissing her now and his mustache tickled her mouth, kissing
her with slow, hot lips that were so leisurely as though he had the
whole night before him.  Charles had never kissed her like this.
Never had the kisses of the Tarleton and Calvert boys made her go
hot and cold and shaky like this.  He bent her body backward and
his lips traveled down her throat to where the cameo fastened her
basque.

"Sweet," he whispered.  "Sweet."

She saw the wagon dimly in the dark and heard the treble piping of
Wade's voice.

"Muvver!  Wade fwightened!"

Into her swaying, darkened mind, cold sanity came back with a rush
and she remembered what she had forgotten for the moment--that she
was frightened too, and Rhett was leaving her, leaving her, the
damned cad.  And on top of it all, he had the consummate gall to
stand here in the road and insult her with his infamous proposals.
Rage and hate flowed into her and stiffened her spine and with one
wrench she tore herself loose from his arms.

"Oh, you cad!" she cried and her mind leaped about, trying to think
of worse things to call him, things she had heard Gerald call Mr.
Lincoln, the MacIntoshes and balky mules, but the words would not
come.  "You low-down, cowardly, nasty, stinking thing!"  And
because she could not think of anything crushing enough, she drew
back her arm and slapped him across the mouth with all the force
she had left.  He took a step backward, his hand going to his face.

"Ah," he said quietly and for a moment they stood facing each other
in the darkness.  Scarlett could hear his heavy breathing, and her
own breath came in gasps as if she had been running hard.

"They were right!  Everybody was right!  You aren't a gentleman!"

"My dear girl," he said, "how inadequate."

She knew he was laughing and the thought goaded her.

"Go on!  Go on now!  I want you to hurry.  I don't want to ever see
you again.  I hope a cannon ball lands right on you.  I hope it
blows you to a million pieces.  I--"

"Never mind the rest.  I follow your general idea.  When I'm dead
on the altar of my country, I hope your conscience hurts you."

She heard him laugh as he turned away and walked back toward the
wagon.  She saw him stand beside it, heard him speak and his voice
was changed, courteous and respectful as it always was when he
spoke to Melanie.

"Mrs. Wilkes?"

Prissy's frightened voice made answer from the wagon.

"Gawdlmighty, Cap'n Butler!  Miss Melly done fainted away back
yonder."

"She's not dead?  Is she breathing?"

"Yassuh, she breathin'."

"Then she's probably better off as she is.  If she were conscious,
I doubt if she could live through all the pain.  Take good care of
her, Prissy.  Here's a shinplaster for you.  Try not to be a bigger
fool than you are."

"Yassuh.  Thankee suh."

"Good-by, Scarlett."

She knew he had turned and was facing her but she did not speak.
Hate choked all utterance.  His feet ground on the pebbles of the
road and for a moment she saw his big shoulders looming up in the
dark.  Then he was gone.  She could hear the sound of his feet for
a while and then they died away.  She came slowly back to the
wagon, her knees shaking.

Why had he gone, stepping off into the dark, into the war, into a
Cause that was lost, into a world that was mad?  Why had he gone,
Rhett who loved the pleasures of women and liquor, the comfort of
good food and soft beds, the feel of fine linen and good leather,
who hated the South and jeered at the fools who fought for it?  Now
he had set his varnished boots upon a bitter road where hunger
tramped with tireless stride and wounds and weariness and heartbreak
ran like yelping wolves.  And the end of the road was death.  He
need not have gone.  He was safe, rich, comfortable.  But he had
gone, leaving her alone in a night as black as blindness, with the
Yankee Army between her and home.

Now she remembered all the bad names she had wanted to call him but
it was too late.  She leaned her head against the bowed neck of the
horse and cried.



CHAPTER XXIV


The bright glare of morning sunlight streaming through the trees
overhead awakened Scarlett.  For a moment, stiffened by the cramped
position in which she had slept, she could not remember where she
was.  The sun blinded her, the hard boards of the wagon under her
were harsh against her body, and a heavy weight lay across her
legs.  She tried to sit up and discovered that the weight was Wade
who lay sleeping with his head pillowed on her knees.  Melanie's
bare feet were almost in her face and, under the wagon seat, Prissy
was curled up like a black cat with the small baby wedged in
between her and Wade.

Then she remembered everything.  She popped up to a sitting
position and looked hastily all around.  Thank God, no Yankees in
sight!  Their hiding place had not been discovered in the night.
It all came back to her now, the nightmare journey after Rhett's
footsteps died away, the endless night, the black road full of ruts
and boulders along which they jolted, the deep gullies on either
side into which the wagon slipped, the fear-crazed strength with
which she and Prissy had pushed the wheels out of the gullies.  She
recalled with a shudder how often she had driven the unwilling
horse into fields and woods when she heard soldiers approaching,
not knowing if they were friends or foes--recalled, too, her
anguish lest a cough, a sneeze or Wade's hiccoughing might betray
them to the marching men.

Oh, that dark road where men went by like ghosts, voices stilled,
only the muffled tramping of feet on soft dirt, the faint clicking
of bridles and the straining creak of leather!  And, oh, that
dreadful moment when the sick horse balked and cavalry and light
cannon rumbled past in the darkness, past where they sat
breathless, so close she could almost reach out and touch them, so
close she could smell the stale sweat on the soldiers' bodies!

When, at last, they had neared Rough and Ready, a few camp fires
were gleaming where the last of Steve Lee's rear guard was awaiting
orders to fall back.  She had circled through a plowed field for a
mile until the light of the fires died out behind her.  And then
she had lost her way in the darkness and sobbed when she could not
find the little wagon path she knew so well.  Then finally having
found it, the horse sank in the traces and refused to move, refused
to rise even when she and Prissy tugged at the bridle.

So she had unharnessed him and crawled, sodden with fatigue, into
the back of the wagon and stretched her aching legs.  She had a
faint memory of Melanie's voice before sleep clamped down her
eyelids, a weak voice that apologized even as it begged:  "Scarlett,
can I have some water, please?"

She had said:  "There isn't any," and gone to sleep before the
words were out of her mouth.

Now it was morning and the world was still and serene and green and
gold with dappled sunshine.  And no soldiers in sight anywhere.
She was hungry and dry with thirst, aching and cramped and filled
with wonder that she, Scarlett O'Hara, who could never rest well
except between linen sheets and on the softest of feather beds, had
slept like a field hand on hard planks.

Blinking in the sunlight, her eyes fell on Melanie and she gasped,
horrified.  Melanie lay so still and white Scarlett thought she
must be dead.  She looked dead.  She looked like a dead, old woman
with her ravaged face and her dark hair snarled and tangled across
it.  Then Scarlett saw with relief the faint rise and fall of her
shallow breathing and knew that Melanie had survived the night.

Scarlett shaded her eyes with her hand and looked about her.  They
had evidently spent the night under the trees in someone's front
yard, for a sand and gravel driveway stretched out before her,
winding away under an avenue of cedars.

"Why, it's the Mallory place!" she thought, her heart leaping with
gladness at the thought of friends and help.

But a stillness as of death hung over the plantation.  The shrubs
and grass of the lawn were cut to pieces where hooves and wheels
and feet had torn frantically back and forth until the soil was
churned up.  She looked toward the house and instead of the old
white clapboard place she knew so well, she saw there only a long
rectangle of blackened granite foundation stones and two tall
chimneys rearing smoke-stained bricks into the charred leaves of
still trees.

She drew a deep shuddering breath.  Would she find Tara like this,
level with the ground, silent as the dead?

"I mustn't think about that now," she told herself hurriedly.  "I
mustn't let myself think about it.  I'll get scared again if I
think about it."  But, in spite of herself, her heart quickened and
each beat seemed to thunder:  "Home!  Hurry!  Home!  Hurry!"

They must be starting on toward home again.  But first they must
find some food and water, especially water.  She prodded Prissy
awake.  Prissy rolled her eyes as she looked about her.

"Fo' Gawd, Miss Scarlett, Ah din' spec ter wake up agin 'cept in de
Promise Lan'."

"You're a long way from there," said Scarlett, trying to smooth
back her untidy hair.  Her face was damp and her body was already
wet with sweat.  She felt dirty and messy and sticky, almost as if
she smelled bad.  Her clothes were crushed and wrinkled from
sleeping in them and she had never felt more acutely tired and sore
in all her life.  Muscles she did not know she possessed ached from
her unaccustomed exertions of the night before and every movement
brought sharp pain.

She looked down at Melanie and saw that her dark eyes were opened.
They were sick eyes, fever bright, and dark baggy circles were
beneath them.  She opened cracking lips and whispered appealingly:
"Water."

"Get up, Prissy," ordered Scarlett.  "We'll go to the well and get
some water."

"But, Miss Scarlett!  Dey mout be hants up dar.  Sposin' somebody
daid up dar?"

"I'll make a hant out of you if you don't get out of this wagon,"
said Scarlett, who was in no mood for argument, as she climbed
lamely down to the ground.

And then she thought of the horse.  Name of God!  Suppose the horse
had died in the night!  He had seemed ready to die when she
unharnessed him.  She ran around the wagon and saw him lying on his
side.  If he were dead, she would curse God and die too.  Somebody
in the Bible had done just that thing.  Cursed God and died.  She
knew just how that person felt.  But the horse was alive--breathing
heavily, sick eyes half closed, but alive.  Well, some water would
help him too.

Prissy climbed reluctantly from the wagon with many groans and
timorously followed Scarlett up the avenue.  Behind the ruins the
row of whitewashed slave quarters stood silent and deserted under
the overhanging trees.  Between the quarters and the smoked stone
foundations, they found the well, and the roof of it still stood
with the bucket far down the well.  Between them, they wound up the
rope, and when the bucket of cool sparkling water appeared out of
the dark depths, Scarlett tilted it to her lips and drank with loud
sucking noises, spilling the water all over herself.

She drank until Prissy's petulant:  "Well, Ah's thusty, too, Miss
Scarlett," made her recall the needs of the others.

"Untie the knot and take the bucket to the wagon and give them
some.  And give the rest to the horse.  Don't you think Miss
Melanie ought to nurse the baby?  He'll starve."

"Law, Miss Scarlett, Miss Melly ain' got no milk--ain' gwine have
none."

"How do you know?"

"Ah's seed too many lak her."

"Don't go putting on any airs with me.  A precious little you knew
about babies yesterday.  Hurry now.  I'm going to try to find
something to eat."

Scarlett's search was futile until in the orchard she found a few
apples.  Soldiers had been there before her and there was none on
the trees.  Those she found on the ground were mostly rotten.  She
filled her skirt with the best of them and came back across the
soft earth, collecting small pebbles in her slippers.  Why hadn't
she thought of putting on stouter shoes last night?  Why hadn't she
brought her sun hat?  Why hadn't she brought something to eat?
She'd acted like a fool.  But, of course, she'd thought Rhett would
take care of them.

Rhett!  She spat on the ground, for the very name tasted bad.  How
she hated him!  How contemptible he had been!  And she had stood
there in the road and let him kiss her--and almost liked it.  She
had been crazy last night.  How despicable he was!

When she came back, she divided up the apples and threw the rest
into the back of the wagon.  The horse was on his feet now but the
water did not seem to have refreshed him much.  He looked far worse
in the daylight than he had the night before.  His hip bones stood
out like an old cow's, his ribs showed like a washboard and his
back was a mass of sores.  She shrank from touching him as she
harnessed him.  When she slipped the bit into his mouth, she saw
that he was practically toothless.  As old as the hills!  While
Rhett was stealing a horse, why couldn't he have stolen a good one?

She mounted the seat and brought down the hickory limb on his back.
He wheezed and started, but he walked so slowly as she turned him
into the road she knew she could walk faster herself with no effort
whatever.  Oh, if only she didn't have Melanie and Wade and the
baby and Prissy to bother with!  How swiftly she could walk home!
Why, she would run home, run every step of the way that would bring
her closer to Tara and to Mother.

They couldn't be more than fifteen miles from home, but at the rate
this old nag traveled it would take all day, for she would have to
stop frequently to rest him.  All day!  She looked down the glaring
red road, cut in deep ruts where cannon wheels and ambulances had
gone over it.  It would be hours before she knew if Tara still
stood and if Ellen were there.  It would be hours before she
finished her journey under the broiling September sun.

She looked back at Melanie who lay with sick eyes closed against
the sun and jerked loose the strings of her bonnet and tossed it to
Prissy.

"Put that over her face.  It'll keep the sun out of her eyes."
Then as the heat beat down upon her unprotected head, she thought:
"I'll be as freckled as a guinea egg before this day is over."

She had never in her life been out in the sunshine without a hat or
veils, never handled reins without gloves to protect the white skin
of her dimpled hands.  Yet here she was exposed to the sun in a
broken-down wagon with a broken-down horse, dirty, sweaty, hungry,
helpless to do anything but plod along at a snail's pace through a
deserted land.  What a few short weeks it had been since she was
safe and secure!  What a little while since she and everyone else
had thought that Atlanta could never fall, that Georgia could never
be invaded.  But the small cloud which appeared in the northwest
four months ago had blown up into a mighty storm and then into a
screaming tornado, sweeping away her world, whirling her out of her
sheltered life, and dropping her down in the midst of this still,
haunted desolation.

Was Tara still standing?  Or was Tara also gone with the wind which
had swept through Georgia?

She laid the whip on the tired horse's back and tried to urge him
on while the waggling wheels rocked them drunkenly from side to
side.



There was death in the air.  In the rays of the late afternoon sun,
every well-remembered field and forest grove was green and still,
with an unearthly quiet that struck terror to Scarlett's heart.
Every empty, shell-pitted house they had passed that day, every
gaunt chimney standing sentinel over smoke-blackened ruins, had
frightened her more.  They had not seen a living human being or
animal since the night before.  Dead men and dead horses, yes, and
dead mules, lying by the road, swollen, covered with flies, but
nothing alive.  No far-off cattle lowed, no birds sang, no wind
waved the trees.  Only the tired plop-plop of the horse's feet and
the weak wailing of Melanie's baby broke the stillness.

The countryside lay as under some dread enchantment.  Or worse
still, thought Scarlett with a chill, like the familiar and dear
face of a mother, beautiful and quiet at last, after death agonies.
She felt that the once-familiar woods were full of ghosts.
Thousands had died in the fighting near Jonesboro.  They were here
in these haunted woods where the slanting afternoon sun gleamed
eerily through unmoving leaves, friends and foes, peering at her in
her rickety wagon, through eyes blinded with blood and red dust--
glazed, horrible eyes.

"Mother!  Mother!" she whispered.  If she could only win to Ellen!
If only, by a miracle of God, Tara were still standing and she
could drive up the long avenue of trees and go into the house and
see her mother's kind, tender face, could feel once more the soft
capable hands that drove out fear, could clutch Ellen's skirts and
bury her face in them.  Mother would know what to do.  She wouldn't
let Melanie and her baby die.  She would drive away all ghosts and
fears with her quiet "Hush, hush."  But Mother was ill, perhaps
dying.

Scarlett laid the whip across the weary rump of the horse.  They
must go faster!  They had crept along this never-ending road all
the long hot day.  Soon it would be night and they would be alone
in this desolation that was death.  She gripped the reins tighter
with hands that were blistered and slapped them fiercely on the
horse's back, her aching arms burning at the movement.

If she could only reach the kind arms of Tara and Ellen and lay
down her burdens, far too heavy for her young shoulders--the dying
woman, the fading baby, her own hungry little boy, the frightened
negro, all looking to her for strength, for guidance, all reading
in her straight back courage she did not possess and strength which
had long since failed.

The exhausted horse did not respond to the whip or reins but
shambled on, dragging his feet, stumbling on small rocks and
swaying as if ready to fall to his knees.  But, as twilight came,
they at last entered the final lap of the long journey.  They
rounded the bend of the wagon path and turned into the main road.
Tara was only a mile away!

Here loomed up the dark bulk of the mock-orange hedge that marked
the beginning of the MacIntosh property.  A little farther on,
Scarlett drew rein in front of the avenue of oaks that led from the
road to old Angus MacIntosh's house.  She peered through the
gathering dusk down the two lines of ancient trees.  All was dark.
Not a single light showed in the house or in the quarters.
Straining her eyes in the darkness she dimly discerned a sight
which had grown familiar through that terrible day--two tall
chimneys, like gigantic tombstones towering above the ruined second
floor, and broken unlit windows blotching the walls like still,
blind eyes.

"Hello!" she shouted, summoning all her strength.  "Hello!"

Prissy clawed at her in a frenzy of fright and Scarlett, turning,
saw that her eyes were rolling in her head.

"Doan holler, Miss Scarlett!  Please, doan holler agin!" she
whispered, her voice shaking.  "Dey ain' no tellin' WHUT mout
answer!"

"Dear God!" thought Scarlett, a shiver running through her.  "Dear
God!  She's right.  Anything might come out of there!"

She flapped the reins and urged the horse forward.  The sight of
the MacIntosh house had pricked the last bubble of hope remaining
to her.  It was burned, in ruins, deserted, as were all the
plantations she had passed that day.  Tara lay only half a mile
away, on the same road, right in the path of the army.  Tara was
leveled, too!  She would find only the blackened bricks, starlight
shining through the roofless walls, Ellen and Gerald gone, the
girls gone, Mammy gone, the negroes gone, God knows where, and this
hideous stillness over everything.

Why had she come on this fool's errand, against all common sense,
dragging Melanie and her child?  Better that they had died in
Atlanta than, tortured by this day of burning sun and jolting
wagon, to die in the silent ruins of Tara.

But Ashley had left Melanie in her care.  "Take care of her."  Oh,
that beautiful, heartbreaking day when he had kissed her good-by
before he went away forever!  "You'll take care of her, won't you?
Promise!"  And she had promised.  Why had she ever bound herself
with such a promise, doubly binding now that Ashley was gone?  Even
in her exhaustion she hated Melanie, hated the tiny mewing voice of
her child which, fainter and fainter, pierced the stillness.  But
she had promised and now they belonged to her, even as Wade and
Prissy belonged to her, and she must struggle and fight for them as
long as she had strength or breath.  She could have left them in
Atlanta, dumped Melanie into the hospital and deserted her.  But
had she done that, she could never face Ashley, either on this
earth or in the hereafter and tell him she had left his wife and
child to die among strangers.

Oh, Ashley!  Where was he tonight while she toiled down this
haunted road with his wife and baby?  Was he alive and did he think
of her as he lay behind the bars at Rock Island?  Or was he dead of
smallpox months ago, rotting in some long ditch with hundreds of
other Confederates?

Scarlett's taut nerves almost cracked as a sudden noise sounded in
the underbrush near them.  Prissy screamed loudly, throwing herself
to the floor of the wagon, the baby beneath her.  Melanie stirred
feebly, her hands seeking the baby, and Wade covered his eyes and
cowered, too frightened to cry.  Then the bushes beside them
crashed apart under heavy hooves and a low moaning bawl assaulted
their ears.

"It's only a cow," said Scarlett, her voice rough with fright.
"Don't be a fool, Prissy.  You've mashed the baby and frightened
Miss Melly and Wade."

"It's a ghos'," moaned Prissy, writhing face down on the wagon
boards.

Turning deliberately, Scarlett raised the tree limb she had been
using as a whip and brought it down across Prissy's back.  She was
too exhausted and weak from fright to tolerate weakness in anyone
else.

"Sit up, you fool," she said, "before I wear this out on you."

Yelping, Prissy raised her head and peering over the side of the
wagon saw it was, indeed, a cow, a red and white animal which stood
looking at them appealingly with large frightened eyes.  Opening
its mouth, it lowed again as if in pain.

"Is it hurt?  That doesn't sound like an ordinary moo."

"Soun' ter me lak her bag full an' she need milkin' bad," said
Prissy, regaining some measure of control.  "Spec it one of Mist'
MacIntosh's dat de niggers driv in de woods an' de Yankees din'
git."

"We'll take it with us," Scarlett decided swiftly.  "Then we can
have some milk for the baby."

"How all we gwine tek a cow wid us, Miss Scarlett?  We kain tek no
cow wid us.  Cow ain' no good nohow effen she ain' been milked
lately.  Dey bags swells up and busts.  Dat's why she hollerin'."

"Since you know so much about it, take off your petticoat and tear
it up and tie her to the back of the wagon."

"Miss Scarlett, you knows Ah ain' had no petticoat fer a month an'
did Ah have one, Ah wouldn' put it on her fer nuthin'.  Ah nebber
had no truck wid cows.  Ah's sceered of cows."

Scarlett laid down the reins and pulled up her skirt.  The lace-
trimmed petticoat beneath was the last garment she possessed that
was pretty--and whole.  She untied the waist tape and slipped it
down over her feet, crushing the soft linen folds between her
hands.  Rhett had brought her that linen and lace from Nassau on
the last boat he slipped through the blockade and she had worked a
week to make the garment.  Resolutely she took it by the hem and
jerked, put it in her mouth and gnawed, until finally the material
gave with a rip and tore the length.  She gnawed furiously, tore
with both hands and the petticoat lay in strips in her hands.  She
knotted the ends with fingers that bled from blisters and shook
from fatigue.

"Slip this over her horns," she directed.  But Prissy balked.

"Ah's sceered of cows, Miss Scarlett.  Ah ain' nebber had nuthin'
ter do wid cows.  Ah ain' no yard nigger.  Ah's a house nigger."

"You're a fool nigger, and the worst day's work Pa ever did was to
buy you," said Scarlett slowly, too tired for anger.  "And if I
ever get the use of my arm again, I'll wear this whip out on you."

There, she thought, I've said "nigger" and Mother wouldn't like
that at all.

Prissy rolled her eyes wildly, peeping first at the set face of her
mistress and then at the cow which bawled plaintively.  Scarlett
seemed the less dangerous of the two, so Prissy clutched at the
sides of the wagon and remained where she was.

Stiffly, Scarlett climbed down from the seat, each movement of
agony of aching muscles.  Prissy was not the only one who was
"sceered" of cows.  Scarlett had always feared them, even the
mildest cow seemed sinister to her, but this was no time to truckle
to small fears when great ones crowded so thick upon her.
Fortunately the cow was gentle.  In its pain it had sought human
companionship and help and it made no threatening gesture as she
looped one end of the torn petticoat about its horns.  She tied the
other end to the back of the wagon, as securely as her awkward
fingers would permit.  Then, as she started back toward the
driver's seat, a vast weariness assailed her and she swayed
dizzily.  She clutched the side of the wagon to keep from falling.

Melanie opened her eyes and, seeing Scarlett standing beside her,
whispered:  "Dear--are we home?"

Home!  Hot tears came to Scarlett's eyes at the word.  Home.
Melanie did not know there was no home and that they were alone in
a mad and desolate world.

"Not yet," she said, as gently as the constriction of her throat
would permit, "but we will be, soon.  I've just found a cow and
soon we'll have some milk for you and the baby."

"Poor baby," whispered Melanie, her hand creeping feebly toward the
child and falling short.

Climbing back into the wagon required all the strength Scarlett
could muster, but at last it was done and she picked up the lines.
The horse stood with head drooping dejectedly and refused to start.
Scarlett laid on the whip mercilessly.  She hoped God would forgive
her for hurting a tired animal.  If He didn't she was sorry.  After
all, Tara lay just ahead, and after the next quarter of a mile, the
horse could drop in the shafts if he liked.

Finally he started slowly, the wagon creaking and the cow lowing
mournfully at every step.  The pained animal's voice rasped on
Scarlett's nerves until she was tempted to stop and untie the
beast.  What good would the cow do them anyway if there should be
no one at Tara?  She couldn't milk her and, even if she could, the
animal would probably kick anyone who touched her sore udder.  But
she had the cow and she might as well keep her.  There was little
else she had in this world now.

Scarlett's eyes grew misty when, at last, they reached the bottom
of a gentle incline, for just over the rise lay Tara!  Then her
heart sank.  The decrepit animal would never pull the hill.  The
slope had always seemed so slight, so gradual, in days when she
galloped up it on her fleet-footed mare.  It did not seem possible
it could have grown so steep since she saw it last.  The horse
would never make it with the heavy load.

Wearily she dismounted and took the animal by the bridle.

"Get out, Prissy," she commanded, "and take Wade.  Either carry him
or make him walk.  Lay the baby by Miss Melanie."

Wade broke into sobs and whimperings from which Scarlett could only
distinguish:  "Dark--dark--Wade fwightened!"

"Miss Scarlett, Ah kain walk.  Mah feets done blistered an' dey's
thoo mah shoes, an' Wade an' me doan weigh so much an'--"

"Get out!  Get out before I pull you out!  And if I do, I'm going
to leave you right here, in the dark by yourself.  Quick, now!"

Prissy moaned, peering at the dark trees that closed about them on
both sides of the road--trees which might reach out and clutch her
if she left the shelter of the wagon.  But she laid the baby beside
Melanie, scrambled to the ground and, reaching up, lifted Wade out.
The little boy sobbed, shrinking close to his nurse.

"Make him hush.  I can't stand it," said Scarlett, taking the horse
by the bridle and pulling him to a reluctant start.  "Be a little
man, Wade, and stop crying or I will come over there and slap you."

Why had God invented children, she thought savagely as she turned
her ankle cruelly on the dark road--useless, crying nuisances they
were, always demanding care, always in the way.  In her exhaustion,
there was no room for compassion for the frightened child, trotting
by Prissy's side, dragging at her hand and sniffling--only a
weariness that she had borne him, only a tired wonder that she had
ever married Charles Hamilton.

"Miss Scarlett," whispered Prissy, clutching her mistress' arm,
"doan le's go ter Tara.  Dey's not dar.  Dey's all done gone.
Maybe dey daid--Maw an' all'm."

The echo of her own thoughts infuriated her and Scarlett shook off
the pinching fingers.

"Then give me Wade's hand.  You can sit right down here and stay."

"No'm!  No'm!"

"Then HUSH!"

How slowly the horse moved!  The moisture from his slobbering mouth
dripped down upon her hand.  Through her mind ran a few words of
the song she had once sung with Rhett--she could not recall the
rest:


"Just a few more days for to tote the weary load--"


"Just a few more steps," hummed her brain, over and over, "just a
few more steps for to tote the weary load."

Then they topped the rise and before them lay the oaks of Tara, a
towering dark mass against the darkening sky.  Scarlett looked
hastily to see if there was a light anywhere.  There was none.

"They are gone!" said her heart, like cold lead in her breast.
"Gone!"

She turned the horse's head into the driveway, and the cedars,
meeting over their heads cast them into midnight blackness.
Peering up the long tunnel of darkness, straining her eyes she saw
ahead--or did she see?  Were her tired eyes playing her tricks?--
the white bricks of Tara blurred and indistinct.  Home!  Home!  The
dear white walls, the windows with the fluttering curtains, the
wide verandas--were they all there ahead of her, in the gloom?  Or
did the darkness mercifully conceal such a horror as the MacIntosh
house?

The avenue seemed miles long and the horse, pulling stubbornly at
her hand, plopped slower and slower.  Eagerly her eyes searched the
darkness.  The roof seemed to be intact.  Could it be--could it
be--?  No, it wasn't possible.  War stopped for nothing, not even
Tara, built to last five hundred years.  It could not have passed
over Tara.

Then the shadowy outline did take form.  She pulled the horse
forward faster.  The white walls did show there through the
darkness.  And untarnished by smoke.  Tara had escaped!  Home!  She
dropped the bridle and ran the last few steps, leaped forward with
an urge to clutch the walls themselves in her arms.  Then she saw a
form, shadowy in the dimness, emerging from the blackness of the
front veranda and standing at the top of the steps.  Tara was not
deserted.  Someone was home!

A cry of joy rose to her throat and died there.  The house was so
dark and still and the figure did not move or call to her.  What
was wrong?  What was wrong?  Tara stood intact, yet shrouded with
the same eerie quiet that hung over the whole stricken countryside.
Then the figure moved.  Stiffly and slowly, it came down the steps.

"Pa?" she whispered huskily, doubting almost that it was he.  "It's
me--Katie Scarlett.  I've come home."

Gerald moved toward her, silent as a sleepwalker, his stiff leg
dragging.  He came close to her, looking at her in a dazed way as
if he believed she was part of a dream.  Putting out his hand, he
laid it on her shoulder.  Scarlett felt it tremble, tremble as if
he had been awakened from a nightmare into a half-sense of reality.

"Daughter," he said with an effort.  "Daughter."

Then he was silent.

Why--he's an old man! thought Scarlett.

Gerald's shoulders sagged.  In the face which she could only see
dimly, there was none of the virility, the restless vitality of
Gerald, and the eyes that looked into hers had almost the same
fear-stunned look that lay in little Wade's eyes.  He was only a
little old man and broken.

And now, fear of unknown things seized her, leaped swiftly out of
the darkness at her and she could only stand and stare at him, all
the flood of questioning dammed up at her lips.

From the wagon the faint wailing sounded again and Gerald seemed to
rouse himself with an effort.

"It's Melanie and her baby," whispered Scarlett rapidly.  "She's
very ill--I brought her home."

Gerald dropped his hand from her arm and straightened his
shoulders.  As he moved slowly to the side of the wagon, there was
a ghostly semblance of the old host of Tara welcoming guests, as if
Gerald spoke words from out of shadowy memory.

"Cousin Melanie!"

Melanie's voice murmured indistinctly.

"Cousin Melanie, this is your home.  Twelve Oaks is burned.  You
must stay with us."

Thoughts of Melanie's prolonged suffering spurred Scarlett to
action.  The present was with her again, the necessity of laying
Melanie and her child on a soft bed and doing those small things
for her that could be done.

"She must be carried.  She can't walk."

There was a scuffle of feet and a dark figure emerged from the cave
of the front hall.  Pork ran down the steps.

"Miss Scarlett!  Miss Scarlett!" he cried.

Scarlett caught him by the arms.  Pork, part and parcel of Tara, as
dear as the bricks and the cool corridors!  She felt his tears
stream down on her hands as he patted her clumsily, crying:  "Sho
is glad you back!  Sho is--"

Prissy burst into tears and incoherent mumblings:  "Poke!  Poke,
honey!"  And little Wade, encouraged by the weakness of his elders,
began sniffling:  "Wade thirsty!"

Scarlett caught them all in hand.

"Miss Melanie is in the wagon and her baby too.  Pork, you must
carry her upstairs very carefully and put her in the back company
room.  Prissy, take the baby and Wade inside and give Wade a drink
of water.  Is Mammy here, Pork?  Tell her I want her."

Galvanized by the authority in her voice, Pork approached the wagon
and fumbled at the backboard.  A moan was wrenched from Melanie as
he half-lifted, half-dragged her from the feather tick on which she
had lain so many hours.  And then she was in Pork's strong arms,
her head drooping like a child's across his shoulder.  Prissy,
holding the baby and dragging Wade by the hand, followed them up
the wide steps and disappeared into the blackness of the hall.

Scarlett's bleeding fingers sought her father's hand urgently.

"Did they get well, Pa?"

"The girls are recovering."

Silence fell and in the silence an idea too monstrous for words
took form.  She could not, could not force it to her lips.  She
swallowed and swallowed but a sudden dryness seemed to have stuck
the sides of her throat together.  Was this the answer to the
frightening riddle of Tara's silence?  As if answering the question
in her mind Gerald spoke.

"Your mother--" he said and stopped.

"And--Mother?"

"Your mother died yesterday."



Her father's arm held tightly in her own, Scarlett felt her way
down the wide dark hall which, even in its blackness, was as
familiar as her own mind.  She avoided the high-backed chairs, the
empty gun rack, the old sideboard with its protruding claw feet,
and she felt herself drawn by instinct to the tiny office at the
back of the house where Ellen always sat, keeping her endless
accounts.  Surely, when she entered that room, Mother would again
be sitting there before the secretary and would look up, quill
poised, and rise with sweet fragrance and rustling hoops to meet
her tired daughter.  Ellen could not be dead, not even though Pa
had said it, said it over and over like a parrot that knows only
one phrase:  "She died yesterday--she died yesterday--she died
yesterday."

Queer that she should feel nothing now, nothing except a weariness
that shackled her limbs with heavy iron chains and a hunger that
made her knees tremble.  She would think of Mother later.  She must
put her mother out of her mind now, else she would stumble stupidly
like Gerald or sob monotonously like Wade.

Pork came down the wide dark steps toward them, hurrying to press
close to Scarlett like a cold animal toward a fire.

"Lights?" she questioned.  "Why is the house so dark, Pork?  Bring
candles."

"Dey tuck all de candles, Miss Scarlett, all 'cept one we been
usin' ter fine things in de dahk wid, an' it's 'bout gone.  Mammy
been usin' a rag in a dish of hawg fat fer a light fer nussin' Miss
Careen an' Miss Suellen."

"Bring what's left of the candle," she ordered.  "Bring it into
Mother's--into the office."

Pork pattered into the dining room and Scarlett groped her way into
the inky small room and sank down on the sofa.  Her father's arm
still lay in the crook of hers, helpless, appealing, trusting, as
only the hands of the very young and the very old can be.

"He's an old man, an old tired man," she thought again and vaguely
wondered why she could not care.

Light wavered into the room as Pork entered carrying high a half-
burned candle stuck in a saucer.  The dark cave came to life, the
sagging old sofa on which they sat, the tall secretary reaching
toward the ceiling with Mother's fragile carved chair before it,
the racks of pigeonholes, still stuffed with papers written in her
fine hand, the worn carpet--all, all were the same, except that
Ellen was not there, Ellen with the faint scent of lemon verbena
sachet and the sweet look in her up-tilted eyes.  Scarlett felt a
small pain in her heart as of nerves numbed by a deep wound,
struggling to make themselves felt again.  She must not let them
come to life now; there was all the rest of her life ahead of her
in which they could ache.  But, not now!  Please, God, not now!

She looked into Gerald's putty-colored face and, for the first time
in her life, she saw him unshaven, his once florid face covered
with silvery bristles.  Pork placed the candle on the candle stand
and came to her side.  Scarlett felt that if he had been a dog he
would have laid his muzzle in her lap and whined for a kind hand
upon his head.

"Pork, how many darkies are here?"

"Miss Scarlett, dem trashy niggers done runned away an' some of dem
went off wid de Yankees an'--"

"How many are left?"

"Dey's me, Miss Scarlett, an' Mammy.  She been nussin' de young
Misses all day.  An' Dilcey, she settin' up wid de young Misses
now.  Us three, Miss Scarlett."

"Us three" where there had been a hundred.  Scarlett with an effort
lifted her head on her aching neck.  She knew she must keep her
voice steady.  To her surprise, words came out as coolly and
naturally as if there had never been a war and she could, by waving
her hand, call ten house servants to her.

"Pork, I'm starving.  Is there anything to eat?"

"No'm.  Dey tuck it all."

"But the garden?"

"Dey tuhned dey hawses loose in it."

"Even the sweet potato hills?"

Something almost like a pleased smile broke his thick lips.

"Miss Scarlett, Ah done fergit de yams.  Ah specs dey's right dar.
Dem Yankee folks ain' never seed no yams an' dey thinks dey's jes'
roots an'--"

"The moon will be up soon.  You go out and dig us some and roast
them.  There's no corn meal?  No dried peas?  No chickens?"

"No'm.  No'm.  Whut chickens dey din' eat right hyah dey cah'ied
off 'cross dey saddles."

They--  They--  They--  Was there no end to what 'They" had done?
Was it not enough to burn and kill?  Must they also leave women and
children and helpless negroes to starve in a country which they had
desolated?

"Miss Scarlett, Ah got some apples Mammy buhied unner de house.  We
been eatin' on dem today."

"Bring them before you dig the potatoes.  And, Pork--I--I feel so
faint.  Is there any wine in the cellar, even blackberry?"

"Oh, Miss Scarlett, de cellar wuz de fust place dey went."

A swimming nausea compounded of hunger, sleeplessness, exhaustion
and stunning blows came on suddenly and she gripped the carved
roses under her hand.

"No wine," she said dully, remembering the endless rows of bottles
in the cellar.  A memory stirred.

"Pork, what of the corn whisky Pa buried in the oak barrel under
the scuppernong arbor?"

Another ghost of a smile lit the black face, a smile of pleasure
and respect.

"Miss Scarlett, you sho is de beatenes' chile!  Ah done plum fergit
dat bah'l.  But, Miss Scarlett, dat whisky ain' no good.  Ain' been
dar but 'bout a year an' whisky ain' no good fer ladies nohow."

How stupid negroes were!  They never thought of anything unless
they were told.  And the Yankees wanted to free them.

"It'll be good enough for this lady and for Pa.  Hurry, Pork, and
dig it up and bring us two glasses and some mint and sugar and I'll
mix a julep."

"Miss Scarlett, you knows dey ain' been no sugar at Tara fer de
longes'.  An' dey hawses done et up all de mint an' dey done broke
all de glasses."

If he says "They" once more, I'll scream.  I can't help it, she
thought, and then, aloud:  "Well, hurry and get the whisky,
quickly.  We'll take it neat."  And, as he turned:  "Wait, Pork.
There's so many things to do that I can't seem to think. . . .  Oh,
yes.  I brought home a horse and a cow and the cow needs milking,
badly, and unharness the horse and water him.  Go tell Mammy to
look after the cow.  Tell her she's got to fix the cow up somehow.
Miss Melanie's baby will die if he doesn't get something to eat
and--"

"Miss Melly ain'--kain--?"  Pork paused delicately.

"Miss Melanie has no milk."  Dear God, but Mother would faint at
that!

"Well, Miss Scarlett, mah Dilcey ten' ter Miss Melly's chile.  Mah
Dilcey got a new chile herseff an' she got mo'n nuff fer both."

"You've got a new baby, Pork?"

Babies, babies, babies.  Why did God make so many babies?  But no,
God didn't make them.  Stupid people made them.

"Yas'm, big fat black boy.  He--"

"Go tell Dilcey to leave the girls.  I'll look after them.  Tell
her to nurse Miss Melanie's baby and do what she can for Miss
Melanie.  Tell Mammy to look after the cow and put that poor horse
in the stable."

"Dey ain' no stable, Miss Scarlett.  Dey use it fer fiah wood."

"Don't tell me any more what 'They' did.  Tell Dilcey to look after
them.  And you, Pork, go dig up that whisky and then some
potatoes."

"But, Miss Scarlett, Ah ain' got no light ter dig by."

"You can use a stick of firewood, can't you?"

"Dey ain' no fiah wood--Dey--"

"Do something. . . .  I don't care what.  But dig those things and
dig them fast.  Now, hurry."

Pork scurried from the room as her voice roughened and Scarlett was
left alone with Gerald.  She patted his leg gently.  She noted how
shrunken were the thighs that once bulged with saddle muscles.  She
must do something to drag him from his apathy--but she could not
ask about Mother.  That must come later, when she could stand it.

"Why didn't they burn Tara?"

Gerald stared at her for a moment as if not hearing her and she
repeated her question.

"Why--" he fumbled, "they used the house as a headquarters."

"Yankees--in this house?"

A feeling that the beloved walls had been defiled rose in her.
This house, sacred because Ellen had lived in it, and those--those--
in it.

"So they were, Daughter.  We saw the smoke from Twelve Oaks, across
the river, before they came.  But Miss Honey and Miss India and
some of their darkies had refugeed to Macon, so we did not worry
about them.  But we couldn't be going to Macon.  The girls were so
sick--your mother--we couldn't be going.  Our darkies ran--I'm not
knowing where.  They stole the wagons and the mules.  Mammy and
Dilcey and Pork--they didn't run.  The girls--your mother--we
couldn't be moving them."

"Yes, yes."  He mustn't talk about Mother.  Anything else.  Even
that General Sherman himself had used this room, Mother's office,
for his headquarters.  Anything else.

"The Yankees were moving on Jonesboro, to cut the railroad.  And
they came up the road from the river--thousands and thousands--and
cannon and horses--thousands.  I met them on the front porch."

"Oh, gallant little Gerald!" thought Scarlett, her heart swelling,
Gerald meeting the enemy on the stairs of Tara as if an army stood
behind him instead of in front of him.

"They said for me to leave, that they would be burning the place.
And I said that they would be burning it over my head.  We could
not leave--the girls--your mother were--"

"And then?"  Must he revert to Ellen always?

"I told them there was sickness in the house, the typhoid, and it
was death to move them.  They could burn the roof over us.  I did
not want to leave anyway--leave Tara--"

His voice trailed off into silence as he looked absently about the
walls and Scarlett understood.  There were too many Irish ancestors
crowding behind Gerald's shoulders, men who had died on scant
acres, fighting to the end rather than leave the homes where they
had lived, plowed, loved, begotten sons.

"I said that they would be burning the house over the heads of
three dying women.  But we would not leave.  The young officer was--
was a gentleman."

"A Yankee a gentleman?  Why, Pa!"

"A gentleman.  He galloped away and soon he was back with a
captain, a surgeon, and he looked at the girls--and your mother."

"You let a damned Yankee into their room?"

"He had opium.  We had none.  He saved your sisters.  Suellen was
hemorrhaging.  He was as kind as he knew how.  And when he reported
that they were--ill--they did not burn the house.  They moved in,
some general, his staff, crowding in.  They filled all the rooms
except the sick room.  And the soldiers--"

He paused again, as if too tired to go on.  His stubbly chin sank
heavily in loose folds of flesh on his chest.  With an effort he
spoke again.

"They camped all round the house, everywhere, in the cotton, in the
corn.  The pasture was blue with them.  That night there were a
thousand campfires.  They tore down the fences and burned them to
cook with and the barns and the stables and the smokehouse.  They
killed the cows and the hogs and the chickens--even my turkeys."
Gerald's precious turkeys.  So they were gone.  "They took things,
even the pictures--some of the furniture, the china--"

"The silver?"

"Pork and Mammy did something with the silver--put it in the well--
but I'm not remembering now," Gerald's voice was fretful.  "Then
they fought the battle from here--from Tara--there was so much
noise, people galloping up and stamping about.  And later the
cannon at Jonesboro--it sounded like thunder--even the girls could
hear it, sick as they were, and they kept saying over and over:
'Papa, make it stop thundering.'"

"And--and Mother?  Did she know Yankees were in the house?"

"She--never knew anything."

"Thank God," said Scarlett.  Mother was spared that.  Mother never
knew, never heard the enemy in the rooms below, never heard the
guns at Jonesboro, never learned that the land which was part of
her heart was under Yankee feet.

"I saw few of them for I stayed upstairs with the girls and your
mother.  I saw the young surgeon mostly.  He was kind, so kind,
Scarlett.  After he'd worked all day with the wounded, he came and
sat with them.  He even left some medicine.  He told me when they
moved on that the girls would recover but your mother--  She was so
frail, he said--too frail to stand it all.  He said she had
undermined her strength. . . ."

In the silence that fell, Scarlett saw her mother as she must have
been in those last days, a thin power of strength in Tara, nursing,
working, doing without sleep and food that the others might rest
and eat.

"And then, they moved on.  Then, they moved on."

He was silent for a long time and then fumbled at her hand.

"It's glad I am you are home," he said simply.

There was a scraping noise on the back porch.  Poor Pork, trained
for forty years to clean his shoes before entering the house, did
not forget, even in a time like this.  He came in, carefully
carrying two gourds, and the strong smell of dripping spirits
entered before him.

"Ah spilt a plen'y, Miss Scarlett.  It's pow'ful hard ter po' outer
a bung hole inter a go'de."

"That's quite all right, Pork, and thank you."  She took the wet
gourd dipper from him, her nostrils wrinkling in distaste at the
reek.

"Drink this, Father," she said, pushing the whisky in its strange
receptacle into his hand and taking the second gourd of water from
Pork.  Gerald raised it, obedient as a child, and gulped noisily.
She handed the water to him but he shook his head.

As she took the whisky from him and held it to her mouth, she saw
his eyes follow her, a vague stirring of disapproval in them.

"I know no lady drinks spirits," she said briefly.  "But today I'm
no lady, Pa, and there is work to do tonight."

She tilted the dipper, drew a deep breath and drank swiftly.  The
hot liquid burned down her throat to her stomach, choking her and
bringing tears to her eyes.  She drew another breath and raised it
again.

"Katie Scarlett," said Gerald, the first note of authority she had
heard in his voice since her return, "that is enough.  You're not
knowing spirits and they will be making you tipsy."

"Tipsy?"  She laughed an ugly laugh.  "Tipsy?  I hope it makes me
drunk.  I would like to be drunk and forget all of this."

She drank again, a slow train of warmth lighting in her veins and
stealing through her body until even her finger tips tingled.  What
a blessed feeling, this kindly fire.  It seemed to penetrate even
her ice-locked heart and strength came coursing back into her body.
Seeing Gerald's puzzled hurt face, she patted his knee again and
managed an imitation of the pert smile he used to love.

"How could it make me tipsy, Pa?  I'm your daughter.  Haven't I
inherited the steadiest head in Clayton County?"

He almost smiled into her tired face.  The whisky was bracing him
too.  She handed it back to him.

"Now you're going to take another drink and then I am going to take
you upstairs and put you to bed."

She caught herself.  Why, this was the way she talked to Wade--she
should not address her father like this.  It was disrespectful.
But he hung on her words.

"Yes, put you to bed," she added lightly, "and give you another
drink--maybe all the dipper and make you go to sleep.  You need
sleep and Katie Scarlett is here, so you need not worry about
anything.  Drink."

He drank again obediently and, slipping her arm through his, she
pulled him to his feet.

"Pork. . . ."

Pork took the gourd in one hand and Gerald's arm in the other.
Scarlett picked up the flaring candle and the three walked slowly
into the dark hall and up the winding steps toward Gerald's room.

The room where Suellen and Carreen lay mumbling and tossing on the
same bed stank vilely with the smell of the twisted rag burning in
a saucer of bacon fat, which provided the only light.  When
Scarlett first opened the door the thick atmosphere of the room,
with all windows closed and the air reeking with sick-room odors,
medicine smells and stinking grease, almost made her faint.
Doctors might say that fresh air was fatal in a sick room but if
she were to sit here, she must have air or die.  She opened the
three windows, bringing in the smell of oak leaves and earth, but
the fresh air could do little toward dispelling the sickening odors
which had accumulated for weeks in this close room.

Carreen and Suellen, emaciated and white, slept brokenly and awoke
to mumble with wide, staring eyes in the tall four-poster bed where
they had whispered together in better, happier days.  In the corner
of the room was an empty bed, a narrow French Empire bed with
curling head and foot, a bed which Ellen had brought from Savannah.
This was where Ellen had lain.

Scarlett sat beside the two girls, staring at them stupidly.  The
whisky taken on a stomach long empty was playing tricks on her.
Sometimes her sisters seemed far away and tiny and their incoherent
voices came to her like the buzz of insects.  And again, they
loomed large, rushing at her with lightning speed.  She was tired,
tired to the bone.  She could lie down and sleep for days.

If she could only lie down and sleep and wake to feel Ellen gently
shaking her arm and saying:  "It is late, Scarlett.  You must not
be so lazy."  But she could not ever do that again.  If there were
only Ellen, someone older than she, wiser and unweary, to whom she
could go!  Someone in whose lap she could lay her head, someone on
whose shoulders she could rest her burdens!

The door opened softly and Dilcey entered, Melanie's baby held to
her breast, the gourd of whisky in her hand.  In the smoky,
uncertain light, she seemed thinner than when Scarlett last saw her
and the Indian blood was more evident in her face.  The high cheek
bones were more prominent, the hawk-bridged nose was sharper and
her copper skin gleamed with a brighter hue.  Her faded calico
dress was open to the waist and her large bronze breast exposed.
Held close against her, Melanie's baby pressed his pale rosebud
mouth greedily to the dark nipple, sucking, gripping tiny fists
against the soft flesh like a kitten in the warm fur of its
mother's belly.

Scarlett rose unsteadily and put a hand on Dilcey's arm.

"It was good of you to stay, Dilcey."

"How could I go off wid them trashy niggers, Miss Scarlett, after
yo' pa been so good to buy me and my little Prissy and yo' ma been
so kine?"

"Sit down, Dilcey.  The baby can eat all right, then?  And how is
Miss Melanie?"

"Nuthin' wrong wid this chile 'cept he hongry, and whut it take to
feed a hongry chile I got.  No'm, Miss Melanie is all right.  She
ain' gwine die, Miss Scarlett.  Doan you fret yo'seff.  I seen too
many, white and black, lak her.  She mighty tired and nervous like
and scared fo' this baby.  But I hesh her and give her some of whut
was lef' in that go'de and she sleepin'."

So the corn whisky had been used by the whole family!  Scarlett
thought hysterically that perhaps she had better give a drink to
little Wade and see if it would stop his hiccoughs--  And Melanie
would not die.  And when Ashley came home--if he did come home . . .
No, she would think of that later too.  So much to think of--
later!  So many things to unravel--to decide.  If only she could
put off the hour of reckoning forever!  She started suddenly as a
creaking noise and a rhythmic "Ker-bunk--ker-bunk--" broke the
stillness of the air outside.

"That's Mammy gettin' the water to sponge off the young Misses.
They takes a heap of bathin'," explained Dilcey, propping the gourd
on the table between medicine bottles and a glass.

Scarlett laughed suddenly.  Her nerves must be shredded if the
noise of the well windlass, bound up in her earliest memories,
could frighten her.  Dilcey looked at her steadily as she laughed,
her face immobile in its dignity, but Scarlett felt that Dilcey
understood.  She sank back in her chair.  If she could only be rid
of her tight stays, the collar that choked her and the slippers
still full of sand and gravel that blistered her feet.

The windlass creaked slowly as the rope wound up, each creak
bringing the bucket nearer the top.  Soon Mammy would be with her--
Ellen's Mammy, her Mammy.  She sat silent, intent on nothing, while
the baby, already glutted with milk, whimpered because he had lost
the friendly nipple.  Dilcey, silent too, guided the child's mouth
back, quieting him in her arms as Scarlett listened to the slow
scuffing of Mammy's feet across the back yard.  How still the night
air was!  The slightest sounds roared in her ears.

The upstairs hall seemed to shake as Mammy's ponderous weight came
toward the door.  Then Mammy was in the room, Mammy with shoulders
dragged down by two heavy wooden buckets, her kind black face sad
with the uncomprehending sadness of a monkey's face.

Her eyes lighted up at the sight of Scarlett, her white teeth
gleamed as she set down the buckets, and Scarlett ran to her,
laying her head on the broad, sagging breasts which had held so
many heads, black and white.  Here was something of stability,
thought Scarlett, something of the old life that was unchanging.
But Mammy's first words dispelled this illusion.

"Mammy's chile is home!  Oh, Miss Scarlett, now dat Miss Ellen's in
de grabe, whut is we gwine ter do?  Oh, Miss Scarlett, effen Ah wuz
jes' daid longside Miss Ellen!  Ah kain make out widout Miss Ellen.
Ain' nuthin' lef' now but mizry an' trouble.  Jes' weery loads,
honey, jes' weery loads."

As Scarlett lay with her head hugged close to Mammy's breast, two
words caught her attention, "weery loads."  Those were the words
which had hummed in her brain that afternoon so monotonously they
had sickened her.  Now, she remembered the rest of the song,
remembered with a sinking heart:


"Just a few more days for to tote the weary load!
No matter, 'twill never be light!
Just a few more days till we totter in the road--"


"No matter, 'twill never be light"--she took the words to her tired
mind.  Would her load never be light?  Was coming home to Tara to
mean, not blessed surcease, but only more loads to carry?  She
slipped from Mammy's arms and, reaching up, patted the wrinkled
black face.

"Honey, yo' han's!"  Mammy took the small hands with their blisters
and blood clots in hers and looked at them with horrified
disapproval.  "Miss Scarlett, Ah done tole you an' tole you dat you
kin allus tell a lady by her han's an'--yo' face sunbuhnt too!"

Poor Mammy, still the martinet about such unimportant things even
though war and death had just passed over her head!  In another
moment she would be saying that young Misses with blistered hands
and freckles most generally didn't never catch husbands and
Scarlett forestalled the remark.

"Mammy, I want you to tell me about Mother.  I couldn't bear to
hear Pa talk about her."

Tears started from Mammy's eyes as she leaned down to pick up the
buckets.  In silence she carried them to the bedside and, turning
down the sheet, began pulling up the night clothes of Suellen and
Carreen.  Scarlett, peering at her sisters in the dim flaring
light, saw that Carreen wore a nightgown, clean but in tatters, and
Suellen lay wrapped in an old negligee, a brown linen garment heavy
with tagging ends of Irish lace.  Mammy cried silently as she
sponged the gaunt bodies, using the remnant of an old apron as a
cloth.

"Miss Scarlett, it wuz dem Slatterys, dem trashy, no-good, low-down
po'-w'ite Slatterys dat kilt Miss Ellen.  Ah done tole her an' tole
her it doan do no good doin' things fer trashy folks, but Miss
Ellen wuz so sot in her ways an' her heart so sof' she couldn'
never say no ter nobody whut needed her."

"Slatterys?" questioned Scarlett, bewildered.  "How do they come
in?"

"Dey wuz sick wid disyere thing," Mammy gestured with her rag to
the two naked girls, dripping with water on their damp sheet.  "Ole
Miss Slattery's gal, Emmie, come down wid it an' Miss Slattery come
hotfootin' it up hyah affer Miss Ellen, lak she allus done w'en
anything wrong.  Why din' she nuss her own?  Miss Ellen had mo'n
she could tote anyways.  But Miss Ellen she went down dar an' she
nuss Emmie.  An' Miss Ellen wuzn' well a-tall herseff, Miss
Scarlett.  Yo' ma hadn' been well fer de longes'.  Dey ain' been
too much ter eat roun' hyah, wid de commissary stealin' eve'y thing
us growed.  An' Miss Ellen eat lak a bird anyways.  An' Ah tole her
an' tole her ter let dem w'ite trash alone, but she din' pay me no
mine.  Well'm, 'bout de time Emmie look lak she gittin' better,
Miss Carreen come down wid it.  Yas'm, de typhoy fly right up de
road an' ketch Miss Carreen, an' den down come Miss Suellen.  So
Miss Ellen, she tuck an' nuss dem too.

"Wid all de fightin' up de road an' de Yankees 'cross de river an'
us not knowin' whut wuz gwine ter happen ter us an' de fe'el han's
runnin' off eve'y night, Ah's 'bout crazy.  But Miss Ellen jes' as
cool as a cucumber.  'Cept she wuz worried ter a ghos' 'bout de
young Misses kase we couldn' git no medicines nor nuthin'.  An' one
night she say ter me affer we done sponge off de young Misses 'bout
ten times, she say, 'Mammy, effen Ah could sell mah soul, Ah'd sell
it fer some ice ter put on mah gals' haids.'

"She wouldn't let Mist' Gerald come in hyah, nor Rosa nor Teena,
nobody but me, kase Ah done had de typhoy.  An' den it tuck her,
Miss Scarlett, an' Ah seed right off dat 'twarnt no use."

Mammy straightened up and, raising her apron, dried her streaming
eyes.

"She went fas', Miss Scarlett, an' even dat nice Yankee doctah
couldn' do nuthin' fer her.  She din' know nuthin' a-tall.  Ah call
ter her an' talk ter her but she din' even know her own Mammy."

"Did she--did she ever mention me--call for me?"

"No, honey.  She think she is lil gal back in Savannah.  She din'
call nobody by name."

Dilcey stirred and laid the sleeping baby across her knees.

"Yes'm, she did.  She did call somebody."

"You hesh yo' mouf, you Injun-nigger!"  Mammy turned with
threatening violence on Dilcey.

"Hush, Mammy!  Who did she call, Dilcey?  Pa?"

"No'm.  Not yo' pa.  It wuz the night the cotton buhnt--"

"Has the cotton gone--tell me quickly!"

"Yes'm, it buhnt up.  The sojers rolls it out of the shed into the
back yard and hollers, 'Here the bigges' bonfiah in Georgia,' and
tech it off."

Three years of stored cotton--one hundred and fifty thousand
dollars, all in one blaze!

"And the fiah light up the place lak it wuz day--we wuz scared the
house would buhn, too, and it wuz so bright in this hyah room that
you could mos' pick a needle offen the flo'.  And w'en the light
shine in the winder, it look lak it wake Miss Ellen up and she set
right up in bed and cry out loud, time and again:  'Feeleep!
Feeleep!'  I ain' never heerd no sech name but it wuz a name and
she wuz callin' him."

Mammy stood as though turned to stone glaring at Dilcey but
Scarlett dropped her head into her hands.  Philippe--who was he and
what had he been to Mother that she died calling him?



The long road from Atlanta to Tara had ended, ended in a blank
wall, the road that was to end in Ellen's arms.  Never again could
Scarlett lie down, as a child, secure beneath her father's roof
with the protection of her mother's love wrapped about her like an
eiderdown quilt.  There was no security or haven to which she could
turn now.  No turning or twisting would avoid this dead end to
which she had come.  There was no one on whose shoulders she could
rest her burdens.  Her father was old and stunned, her sisters ill,
Melanie frail and weak, the children helpless, and the negroes
looking up to her with childlike faith, clinging to her skirts,
knowing that Ellen's daughter would be the refuge Ellen had always
been.

Through the window, in the faint light of the rising moon, Tara
stretched before her, negroes gone, acres desolate, barns ruined,
like a body bleeding under her eyes, like her own body, slowly
bleeding.  This was the end of the road, quivering old age,
sickness, hungry mouths, helpless hands plucking at her skirts.
And at the end of this road, there was nothing--nothing but
Scarlett O'Hara Hamilton, nineteen years old, a widow with a little
child.

What would she do with all of this?  Aunt Pitty and the Burrs in
Macon could take Melanie and her baby.  If the girls recovered,
Ellen's family would have to take them, whether they liked it or
not.  And she and Gerald could turn to Uncle James and Andrew.

She looked at the thin forms, tossing before her, the sheets about
them moist and dark from dripping water.  She did not like Suellen.
She saw it now with a sudden clarity.  She had never liked her.
She did not especially love Carreen--she could not love anyone who
was weak.  But they were of her blood, part of Tara.  No, she could
not let them live out their lives in their aunts' homes as poor
relations.  An O'Hara a poor relation, living on charity bread and
sufferance!  Oh, never that!

Was there no escape from this dead end?  Her tired brain moved so
slowly.  She raised her hands to her head as wearily as if the air
were water against which her arms struggled.  She took the gourd
from between the glass and bottle and looked in it.  There was some
whisky left in the bottom, how much she could not tell in the
uncertain light.  Strange that the sharp smell did not offend her
nostrils now.  She drank slowly but this time the liquid did not
burn, only a dull warmth followed.

She set down the empty gourd and looked about her.  This was all a
dream, this smoke-filled dim room, the scrawny girls, Mammy
shapeless and huge crouching beside the bed, Dilcey a still bronze
image with the sleeping pink morsel against her dark breast--all a
dream from which she would awake, to smell bacon frying in the
kitchen, hear the throaty laughter of the negroes and the creaking
of wagons fieldward bound, and Ellen's gentle insistent hand upon
her.

Then she discovered she was in her own room, on her own bed, faint
moonlight pricking the darkness, and Mammy and Dilcey were
undressing her.  The torturing stays no longer pinched her waist
and she could breathe deeply and quietly to the bottom of her lungs
and her abdomen.  She felt her stockings being stripped gently from
her and heard Mammy murmuring indistinguishable comforting sounds
as she bathed her blistered feet.  How cool the water was, how good
to lie here in softness, like a child.  She sighed and relaxed and
after a time which might have been a year or a second, she was
alone and the room was brighter as the rays of the moon streamed in
across the bed.

She did not know she was drunk, drunk with fatigue and whisky.  She
only knew she had left her tired body and floated somewhere above
it where there was no pain and weariness and her brain saw things
with an inhuman clarity.

She was seeing things with new eyes for, somewhere along the long
road to Tara, she had left her girlhood behind her.  She was no
longer plastic clay, yielding imprint to each new experience.  The
clay had hardened, some time in this indeterminate day which had
lasted a thousand years.  Tonight was the last time she would ever
be ministered to as a child.  She was a woman now and youth was
gone.

No, she could not, would not, turn to Gerald's or Ellen's families.
The O'Haras did not take charity.  The O'Haras looked after their
own.  Her burdens were her own and burdens were for shoulders
strong enough to bear them.  She thought without surprise, looking
down from her height, that her shoulders were strong enough to bear
anything now, having borne the worst that could ever happen to her.
She could not desert Tara; she belonged to the red acres far more
than they could ever belong to her.  Her roots went deep into the
blood-colored soil and sucked up life, as did the cotton.  She
would stay at Tara and keep it, somehow, keep her father and her
sisters, Melanie and Ashley's child, the negroes.  Tomorrow--oh,
tomorrow!  Tomorrow she would fit the yoke about her neck.
Tomorrow there would be so many things to do.  Go to Twelve Oaks
and the MacIntosh place and see if anything was left in the
deserted gardens, go to the river swamps and beat them for straying
hogs and chickens, go to Jonesboro and Lovejoy with Ellen's
jewelry--there must be someone left there who would sell something
to eat.  Tomorrow--tomorrow--her brain ticked slowly and more
slowly, like a clock running down, but the clarity of vision
persisted.

Of a sudden, the oft-told family tales to which she had listened
since babyhood, listened half-bored, impatient and but partly
comprehending, were crystal clear.  Gerald, penniless, had raised
Tara; Ellen had risen above some mysterious sorrow; Grandfather
Robillard, surviving the wreck of Napoleon's throne, had founded
his fortunes anew on the fertile Georgia coast; Great-grandfather
Prudhomme had carved a small kingdom out of the dark jungles of
Haiti, lost it, and lived to see his name honored in Savannah.
There were the Scarletts who had fought with the Irish Volunteers
for a free Ireland and been hanged for their pains and the O'Haras
who died at the Boyne, battling to the end for what was theirs.

All had suffered crushing misfortunes and had not been crushed.
They had not been broken by the crash of empires, the machetes of
revolting slaves, war, rebellion, proscription, confiscation.
Malign fate had broken their necks, perhaps, but never their
hearts.  They had not whined, they had fought.  And when they died,
they died spent but unquenched.  All of those shadowy folks whose
blood flowed in her veins seemed to move quietly in the moonlit
room.  And Scarlett was not surprised to see them, these kinsmen
who had taken the worst that fate could send and hammered it into
the best.  Tara was her fate, her fight, and she must conquer it.

She turned drowsily on her side, a slow creeping blackness
enveloping her mind.  Were they really there, whispering wordless
encouragement to her, or was this part of her dream?

"Whether you are there or not," she murmured sleepily, "good night--
and thank you."



