CHAPTER VIII


As the train carried Scarlett northward that May morning in 1862,
she thought that Atlanta couldn't possibly be so boring as
Charleston and Savannah had been and, in spite of her distaste for
Miss Pittypat and Melanie, she looked forward with some curiosity
toward seeing how the town had fared since her last visit, in the
winter before the war began.

Atlanta had always interested her more than any other town because
when she was a child Gerald had told her that she and Atlanta were
exactly the same age.  She discovered when she grew older that
Gerald had stretched the truth somewhat, as was his habit when a
little stretching would improve a story; but Atlanta was only nine
years older than she was, and that still left the place amazingly
young by comparison with any other town she had ever heard of.
Savannah and Charleston had the dignity of their years, one being
well along in its second century and the other entering its third,
and in her young eyes they had always seemed like aged
grandmothers fanning themselves placidly in the sun.  But Atlanta
was of her own generation, crude with the crudities of youth and
as headstrong and impetuous as herself.

The story Gerald had told her was based on the fact that she and
Atlanta were christened in the same year.  In the nine years
before Scarlett was born, the town had been called, first,
Terminus and then Marthasville, and not until the year of
Scarlett's birth had it become Atlanta.

When Gerald first moved to north Georgia, there had been no
Atlanta at all, not even the semblance of a village, and
wilderness rolled over the site.  But the next year, in 1836, the
State had authorized the building of a railroad northwestward
through the territory which the Cherokees had recently ceded.  The
destination of the proposed railroad, Tennessee and the West, was
clear and definite, but its beginning point in Georgia was
somewhat uncertain until, a year later, an engineer drove a stake
in the red clay to mark the southern end of the line, and Atlanta,
born Terminus, had begun.

There were no railroads then in north Georgia, and very few
anywhere else.  But during the years before Gerald married Ellen,
the tiny settlement, twenty-five miles north of Tara, slowly grew
into a village and the tracks slowly pushed northward.  Then the
railroad building era really began.  From the old city of Augusta,
a second railroad was extended westward across the state to
connect with the new road to Tennessee.  From the old city of
Savannah, a third railroad was built first to Macon, in the heart
of Georgia, and then north through Gerald's own county to Atlanta,
to link up with the other two roads and give Savannah's harbor a
highway to the West.  From the same junction point, the young
Atlanta, a fourth railroad was constructed southwestward to
Montgomery and Mobile.

Born of a railroad, Atlanta grew as its railroads grew.  With the
completion of the four lines, Atlanta was now connected with the
West, with the South, with the Coast and, through Augusta, with
the North and East.  It had become the crossroads of travel north
and south and east and west, and the little village leaped to
life.

In a space of time but little longer than Scarlett's seventeen
years, Atlanta had grown from a single stake driven in the ground
into a thriving small city of ten thousand that was the center of
attention for the whole state.  The older, quieter cities were
wont to look upon the bustling new town with the sensations of a
hen which has hatched a duckling.  Why was the place so different
from the other Georgia towns?  Why did it grow so fast?  After
all, they thought, it had nothing whatever to recommend it--only
its railroads and a bunch of mighty pushy people.

The people who settled the town called successively Terminus,
Marthasville and Atlanta, were a pushy people.  Restless,
energetic people from the older sections of Georgia and from more
distant states were drawn to this town that sprawled itself around
the junction of the railroads in its center.  They came with
enthusiasm.  They built their stores around the five muddy red
roads that crossed near the depot.  They built their fine homes on
Whitehall and Washington streets and along the high ridge of land
on which countless generations of moccasined Indian feet had
beaten a path called the Peachtree Trail.  They were proud of the
place, proud of its growth, proud of themselves for making it
grow.  Let the older towns call Atlanta anything they pleased.
Atlanta did not care.

Scarlett had always liked Atlanta for the very same reasons that
made Savannah, Augusta and Macon condemn it.  Like herself, the
town was a mixture of the old and new in Georgia, in which the old
often came off second best in its conflicts with the self-willed
and vigorous new.  Moreover, there was something personal,
exciting about a town that was born--or at least christened--the
same year she was christened.



The night before had been wild and wet with rain, but when
Scarlett arrived in Atlanta a warm sun was at work, bravely
attempting to dry the streets that were winding rivers of red mud.
In the open space around the depot, the soft ground had been cut
and churned by the constant flow of traffic in and out until it
resembled an enormous hog wallow, and here and there vehicles were
mired to the hubs in the ruts.  A never-ceasing line of army
wagons and ambulances, loading and unloading supplies and wounded
from the trains, made the mud and confusion worse as they toiled
in and struggled out, drivers swearing, mules plunging and mud
spattering for yards.

Scarlett stood on the lower step of the train, a pale pretty
figure in her black mourning dress, her crepe veil fluttering
almost to her heels.  She hesitated, unwilling to soil her
slippers and hems, and looked about in the shouting tangle of
wagons, buggies and carriages for Miss Pittypat.  There was no
sign of that chubby pink-cheeked lady, but as Scarlett searched
anxiously a spare old negro, with grizzled kinks and an air of
dignified authority, came toward her through the mud, his hat in
his hand.

"Dis Miss Scarlett, ain' it?  Dis hyah Peter, Miss Pitty's
coachman.  Doan step down in dat mud," he ordered severely, as
Scarlett gathered up her skirts preparatory to descending.  "You
is as bad as Miss Pitty an' she lak a chile 'bout gittin' her
feets wet.  Lemme cahy you."

He picked Scarlett up with ease despite his apparent frailness and
age and, observing Prissy standing on the platform of the train,
the baby in her arms, he paused:  "Is dat air chile yo' nuss?
Miss Scarlett, she too young ter be handlin' Mist' Charles'
onlies' baby!  But we ten' to dat later.  You gal, foller me, an'
doan you go drappin' dat baby."

Scarlett submitted meekly to being carried toward the carriage and
also to the peremptory manner in which Uncle Peter criticized her
and Prissy.  As they went through the mud with Prissy sloshing,
pouting, after them, she recalled what Charles had said about
Uncle Peter.

"He went through all the Mexican campaigns with Father, nursed him
when he was wounded--in fact, he saved his life.  Uncle Peter
practically raised Melanie and me, for we were very young when
Father and Mother died.  Aunt Pitty had a falling out with her
brother, Uncle Henry, about that time, so she came to live with us
and take care of us.  She is the most helpless soul--just like a
sweet grown-up child, and Uncle Peter treats her that way.  To
save her life, she couldn't make up her mind about anything, so
Peter makes it up for her.  He was the one who decided I should
have a larger allowance when I was fifteen, and he insisted that I
should go to Harvard for my senior year, when Uncle Henry wanted
me to take my degree at the University.  And he decided when Melly
was old enough to put up her hair and go to parties.  He tells
Aunt Pitty when it's too cold or too wet for her to go calling and
when she should wear a shawl. . . .  He's the smartest old darky
I've ever seen and about the most devoted.  The only trouble with
him is that he owns the three of us, body and soul, and he knows
it."

Charles' words were confirmed as Peter climbed onto the box and
took the whip.

"Miss Pitty in a state bekase she din' come ter meet you.  She's
feared you mout not unnerstan' but Ah tole her she an' Miss Melly
jes' git splashed wid mud an' ruin dey new dresses an' Ah'd
'splain ter you.  Miss Scarlett, you better tek dat chile.  Dat
lil pickaninny gwine let it drap."

Scarlett looked at Prissy and sighed.  Prissy was not the most
adequate of nurses.  Her recent graduation from a skinny
pickaninny with brief skirts and stiffly wrapped braids into the
dignity of a calico dress and starched white turban was an
intoxicating affair.  She would never have arrived at this
eminence so early in life had not the exigencies of war and the
demands of the commissary department on Tara made it impossible
for Ellen to spare Mammy or Dilcey or even Rosa or Teena.  Prissy
had never been more than a mile away from Twelve Oaks or Tara
before, and the trip on the train plus her elevation to nurse was
almost more than the brain in her little black skull could bear.
The twenty-mile journey from Jonesboro to Atlanta had so excited
her that Scarlett had been forced to hold the baby all the way.
Now, the sight of so many buildings and people completed Prissy's
demoralization.  She twisted from side to side, pointed, bounced
about and so jounced the baby that he wailed miserably.

Scarlett longed for the fat old arms of Mammy.  Mammy had only to
lay hands on a child and it hushed crying.  But Mammy was at Tara
and there was nothing Scarlett could do.  It was useless for her
to take little Wade from Prissy.  He yelled just as loudly when
she held him as when Prissy did.  Besides, he would tug at the
ribbons of her bonnet and, no doubt, rumple her dress.  So she
pretended she had not heard Uncle Peter's suggestion.

"Maybe I'll learn about babies sometime," she thought irritably,
as the carriage jolted and swayed out of the morass surrounding
the station, "but I'm never going to like fooling with them."  And
as Wade's face went purple with his squalling, she snapped
crossly:  "Give him that sugar-tit in your pocket, Priss.
Anything to make him hush.  I know he's hungry, but I can't do
anything about that now."

Prissy produced the sugar-tit, given her that morning by Mammy,
and the baby's wails subsided.  With quiet restored and with the
new sights that met her eyes, Scarlett's spirits began to rise a
little.  When Uncle Peter finally maneuvered the carriage out of
the mudholes and onto Peachtree Street, she felt the first surge
of interest she had known in months.  How the town had grown!  It
was not much more than a year since she had last been here, and it
did not seem possible that the little Atlanta she knew could have
changed so much.

For the past year, she had been so engrossed in her own woes, so
bored by any mention of war, she did not know that from the minute
the fighting first began, Atlanta had been transformed.  The same
railroads which had made the town the crossroads of commerce in
time of peace were now of vital strategic importance in time of
war.  Far from the battle lines, the town and its railroads
provided the connecting link between the two armies of the
Confederacy, the army in Virginia and the army in Tennessee and
the West.  And Atlanta likewise linked both of the armies with the
deeper South from which they drew their supplies.  Now, in
response to the needs of war, Atlanta had become a manufacturing
center, a hospital base and one of the South's chief depots for
the collecting of food and supplies for the armies in the field.

Scarlett looked about her for the little town she remembered so
well.  It was gone.  The town she was now seeing was like a baby
grown overnight into a busy, sprawling giant.

Atlanta was humming like a beehive, proudly conscious of its
importance to the Confederacy, and work was going forward night
and day toward turning an agricultural section into an industrial
one.  Before the war there had been few cotton factories, woolen
mills, arsenals and machine shops south of Maryland--a fact of
which all Southerners were proud.  The South produced statesmen
and soldiers, planters and doctors, lawyers and poets, but
certainly not engineers or mechanics.  Let the Yankees adopt such
low callings.  But now the Confederate ports were stoppered with
Yankee gunboats, only a trickle of blockade-run goods was slipping
in from Europe, and the South was desperately trying to manufacture
her own war materials.  The North could call on the whole world for
supplies and for soldiers, and thousands of Irish and Germans were
pouring into the Union Army, lured by the bounty money offered by
the North.  The South could only turn in upon itself.

In Atlanta, there were machine factories tediously turning out
machinery to manufacture war materials--tediously, because there
were few machines in the South from which they could model and
nearly every wheel and cog had to be made from drawings that came
through the blockade from England.  There were strange faces on
the streets of Atlanta now, and citizens who a year ago would have
pricked up their ears at the sound of even a Western accent paid
no heed to the foreign tongues of Europeans who had run the
blockade to build machines and turn out Confederate munitions.
Skilled men these, without whom the Confederacy would have been
hard put to make pistols, rifles, cannon and powder.

Almost the pulsing of the town's heart could be felt as the work
went forward night and day, pumping the materials of war up the
railway arteries to the two battle fronts.  Trains roared in and
out of the town at all hours.  Soot from the newly erected
factories fell in showers on the white houses.  By night, the
furnaces glowed and the hammers clanged long after townsfolk were
abed.  Where vacant lots had been a year before, there were now
factories turning out harness, saddles and shoes, ordnance-supply
plants making rifles and cannon, rolling mills and foundries
producing iron rails and freight cars to replace those destroyed
by the Yankees, and a variety of industries manufacturing spurs,
bridle bits, buckles, tents, buttons, pistols and swords.  Already
the foundries were beginning to feel the lack of iron, for little
or none came through the blockade, and the mines in Alabama were
standing almost idle while the miners were at the front.  There
were no iron picket fences, iron summerhouses, iron gates or even
iron statuary on the lawns of Atlanta now, for they had early
found their way into the melting pots of the rolling mills.

Here along Peachtree Street and near-by streets were the
headquarters of the various army departments, each office swarming
with uniformed men, the commissary, the signal corps, the mail
service, the railway transport, the provost marshal.  On the
outskirts of town were the remount depots where horses and mules
milled about in large corrals, and along side streets were the
hospitals.  As Uncle Peter told her about them, Scarlett felt that
Atlanta must be a city of the wounded, for there were general
hospitals, contagious hospitals, convalescent hospitals without
number.  And every day the trains just below Five Points disgorged
more sick and more wounded.

The little town was gone and the face of the rapidly growing city
was animated with never-ceasing energy and bustle.  The sight of
so much hurrying made Scarlett, fresh from rural leisure and
quiet, almost breathless, but she liked it.  There was an exciting
atmosphere about the place that uplifted her.  It was as if she
could actually feel the accelerated steady pulse of the town's
heart beating in time with her own.

As they slowly made their way through the mudholes of the town's
chief street, she noted with interest all the new buildings and
the new faces.  The sidewalks were crowded with men in uniform,
bearing the insignia of all ranks and all service branches; the
narrow street was jammed with vehicles--carriages, buggies,
ambulances, covered army wagons with profane drivers swearing as
the mules struggled through the ruts; gray-clad couriers dashed
spattering through the streets from one headquarters to another,
bearing orders and telegraphic dispatches; convalescents limped
about on crutches, usually with a solicitous lady at either elbow;
bugle and drum and barked orders sounded from the drill fields
where the recruits were being turned into soldiers; and with her
heart in her throat, Scarlett had her first sight of Yankee
uniforms, as Uncle Peter pointed with his whip to a detachment of
dejected-looking bluecoats being shepherded toward the depot by a
squad of Confederates with fixed bayonets, to entrain for the
prison camp.

"Oh," thought Scarlett, with the first feeling of real pleasure
she had experienced since the day of the barbecue, "I'm going to
like it here!  It's so alive and exciting!"

The town was even more alive than she realized, for there were new
barrooms by the dozens; prostitutes, following the army, swarmed
the town and bawdy houses were blossoming with women to the
consternation of the church people.  Every hotel, boarding house
and private residence was crammed with visitors who had come to be
near wounded relatives in the big Atlanta hospitals.  There were
parties and balls and bazaars every week and war weddings without
number, with the grooms on furlough in bright gray and gold braid
and the brides in blockade-run finery, aisles of crossed swords,
toasts drunk in blockaded champagne and tearful farewells.
Nightly the dark tree-lined streets resounded with dancing feet,
and from parlors tinkled pianos where soprano voices blended with
those of soldier guests in the pleasing melancholy of "The Bugles
Sang Truce" and "Your Letter Came, but Came Too Late"--plaintive
ballads that brought exciting tears to soft eyes which had never
known the tears of real grief.

As they progressed down the street, through the sucking mud,
Scarlett bubbled over with questions and Peter answered them,
pointing here and there with his whip, proud to display his
knowledge.

"Dat air de arsenal.  Yas'm, dey keeps guns an' sech lak dar.
No'm, dem air ain' sto's, dey's blockade awfisses.  Law, Miss
Scarlett, doan you know whut blockade awfisses is?  Dey's awfisses
whar furriners stays dat buy us Confedruts' cotton an' ship it
outer Cha'ston and Wilmin'ton an' ship us back gunpowder.  No'm,
Ah ain' sho whut kine of furriners dey is.  Miss Pitty, she say
dey is Inlish but kain nobody unnerstan a' wud dey says.  Yas'm
'tis pow'ful smoky an' de soot jes' ruinin' Miss Pitty's silk
cuttins.  It' frum de foun'ry an' de rollin' mills.  An' de noise
dey meks at night!  Kain nobody sleep.  No'm, Ah kain stop fer you
ter look around.  Ah done promise Miss Pitty Ah bring you straight
home. . . .  Miss Scarlett, mek yo' cu'tsy.  Dar's Miss
Merriwether an' Miss Elsing a-bowin' to you."

Scarlett vaguely remembered two ladies of those names who came
from Atlanta to Tara to attend her wedding and she remembered that
they were Miss Pittypat's best friends.  So she turned quickly
where Uncle Peter pointed and bowed.  The two were sitting in a
carriage outside a drygoods store.  The proprietor and two clerks
stood on the sidewalk with armfuls of bolts of cotton cloth they
had been displaying.  Mrs. Merriwether was a tall, stout woman and
so tightly corseted that her bust jutted forward like the prow of
a ship.  Her iron-gray hair was eked out by a curled false fringe
that was proudly brown and disdained to match the rest of her
hair.  She had a round, highly colored face in which was combined
good-natured shrewdness and the habit of command.  Mrs. Elsing was
younger, a thin frail woman, who had been a beauty, and about her
there still clung a faded freshness, a dainty imperious air.

These two ladies with a third, Mrs. Whiting, were the pillars of
Atlanta.  They ran the three churches to which they belonged, the
clergy, the choirs and the parishioners.  They organized bazaars
and presided over sewing circles, they chaperoned balls and
picnics, they knew who made good matches and who did not, who
drank secretly, who were to have babies and when.  They were
authorities on the genealogies of everyone who was anyone in
Georgia, South Carolina and Virginia and did not bother their
heads about the other states, because they believed that no one
who was anybody ever came from states other than these three.
They knew what was decorous behavior and what was not and they
never failed to make their opinions known--Mrs. Merriwether at the
top of her voice, Mrs. Elsing in an elegant die-away drawl and
Mrs. Whiting in a distressed whisper which showed how much she
hated to speak of such things.  These three ladies disliked and
distrusted one another as heartily as the First Triumvirate of
Rome, and their close alliance was probably for the same reason.

"I told Pitty I had to have you in my hospital," called Mrs.
Merriweather, smiling.  "Don't you go promising Mrs. Meade or Mrs.
Whiting!"

"I won't," said Scarlett, having no idea what Mrs. Merriwether was
talking about but feeling a glow of warmth at being welcomed and
wanted.  "I hope to see you again soon."

The carriage plowed its way farther and halted for a moment to
permit two ladies with baskets of bandages on their arms to pick
precarious passages across the sloppy street on stepping stones.
At the same moment, Scarlett's eye was caught by a figure on the
sidewalk in a brightly colored dress--too bright for street wear--
covered by a Paisley shawl with fringes to the heels.  Turning she
saw a tall handsome woman with a bold face and a mass of red hair,
too red to be true.  It was the first time she had ever seen any
woman who she knew for certain had "done something to her hair"
and she watched her, fascinated.

"Uncle Peter, who is that?" she whispered.

"Ah doan know."

"You do, too.  I can tell.  Who is she?"

"Her name Belle Watling," said Uncle Peter, his lower lip
beginning to protrude.

Scarlett was quick to catch the fact that he had not preceded the
name with "Miss" or "Mrs."

"Who is she?"

"Miss Scarlett," said Peter darkly, laying the whip on the
startled horse, "Miss Pitty ain' gwine ter lak it you astin'
questions dat ain' none of yo' bizness.  Dey's a passel of no-
count folks in dis town now dat it ain' no use talkin' about."

"Good Heavens!" thought Scarlett, reproved into silence.  "That
must be a bad woman!"

She had never seen a bad woman before and she twisted her head and
stared after her until she was lost in the crowd.

The stores and the new war buildings were farther apart now, with
vacant lots between.  Finally the business section fell behind and
the residences came into view.  Scarlett picked them out as old
friends, the Leyden house, dignified and stately; the Bonnells',
with little white columns and green blinds; the close-lipped red-
brick Georgian home of the McLure family, behind its low box
hedges.  Their progress was slower now, for from porches and
gardens and sidewalks ladies called to her.  Some she knew
slightly, others she vaguely remembered, but most of them she knew
not at all.  Pittypat had certainly broadcast her arrival.  Little
Wade had to be held up time and again, so that ladies who ventured
as far through the ooze as their carriage blocks could exclaim
over him.  They all cried to her that she must join their knitting
and sewing circles and their hospital committees, and no one
else's, and she promised recklessly to right and left.

As they passed a rambling green clapboard house, a little black
girl posted on the front steps cried, "Hyah she come," and Dr.
Meade and his wife and little thirteen-year-old Phil emerged,
calling greetings.  Scarlett recalled that they too had been at
her wedding.  Mrs. Meade mounted her carriage block and craned her
neck for a view of the baby, but the doctor, disregarding the mud,
plowed through to the side of the carriage.  He was tall and gaunt
and wore a pointed beard of iron gray, and his clothes hung on his
spare figure as though blown there by a hurricane.  Atlanta
considered him the root of all strength and all wisdom and it was
not strange that he had absorbed something of their belief.  But
for all his habit of making oracular statements and his slightly
pompous manner, he was as kindly a man as the town possessed.

After shaking her hand and prodding Wade in the stomach and
complimenting him, the doctor announced that Aunt Pittypat had
promised on oath that Scarlett should be on no other hospital and
bandage-rolling committee save Mrs. Meade's.

"Oh, dear, but I've promised a thousand ladies already!" said
Scarlett.

"Mrs. Merriwether, I'll be bound!" cried Mrs. Meade indignantly.
"Drat the woman!  I believe she meets every train!"

"I promised because I hadn't a notion what it was all about,"
Scarlett confessed.  "What are hospital committees anyway?"

Both the doctor and his wife looked slightly shocked at her
ignorance.

"But, of course, you've been buried in the country and couldn't
know," Mrs. Meade apologized for her.  "We have nursing committees
for different hospitals and for different days.  We nurse the men
and help the doctors and make bandages and clothes and when the
men are well enough to leave the hospitals we take them into our
homes to convalesce till they are able to go back in the army.
And we look after the wives and families of some of the wounded
who are destitute--yes, worse than destitute.  Dr. Meade is at the
Institute hospital where my committee works, and everyone says
he's marvelous and--"

"There, there, Mrs. Meade," said the doctor fondly.  "Don't go
bragging on me in front of folks.  It's little enough I can do,
since you wouldn't let me go in the army."

"'Wouldn't let!'" she cried indignantly.  "Me?  The town wouldn't
let you and you know it.  Why, Scarlett, when folks heard he was
intending to go to Virginia as an army surgeon, all the ladies
signed a petition begging him to stay here.  Of course, the town
couldn't do without you."

"There, there, Mrs. Meade," said the doctor, basking obviously in
the praise.  "Perhaps with one boy at the front, that's enough for
the time being."

"And I'm going next year!" cried little Phil hopping about
excitedly.  "As a drummer boy.  I'm learning how to drum now.  Do
you want to hear me?  I'll run get my drum."

"No, not now," said Mrs. Meade, drawing him closer to her, a
sudden look of strain coming over her face.  "Not next year,
darling.  Maybe the year after."

"But the war will be over then!" he cried petulantly, pulling away
from her.  "And you promised!"

Over his head the eyes of the parents met and Scarlett saw the
look.  Darcy Meade was in Virginia and they were clinging closer
to the little boy that was left.

Uncle Peter cleared his throat.

"Miss Pitty were in a state when Ah lef' home an' ef Ah doan git
dar soon, she'll done swooned."

"Good-by.  I'll be over this afternoon," called Mrs. Meade.  "And
you tell Pitty for me that if you aren't on my committee, she's
going to be in a worse state."

The carriage slipped and slid down the muddy road and Scarlett
leaned back on the cushions and smiled.  She felt better now than
she had felt in months.  Atlanta, with its crowds and its hurry
and its undercurrent of driving excitement, was very pleasant,
very exhilarating, so very much nicer than the lonely plantation
out from Charleston, where the bellow of alligators broke the
night stillness; better than Charleston itself, dreaming in its
gardens behind its high walls; better than Savannah with its wide
streets lined with palmetto and the muddy river beside it.  Yes,
and temporarily even better than Tara, dear though Tara was.

There was something exciting about this town with its narrow muddy
streets, lying among rolling red hills, something raw and crude
that appealed to the rawness and crudeness underlying the fine
veneer that Ellen and Mammy had given her.  She suddenly felt that
this was where she belonged, not in serene and quiet old cities,
flat beside yellow waters.

The houses were farther and farther apart now, and leaning out
Scarlett saw the red brick and slate roof of Miss Pittypat's
house.  It was almost the last house on the north side of town.
Beyond it, Peachtree road narrowed and twisted under great trees
out of sight into thick quiet woods.  The neat wooden-paneled
fence had been newly painted white and the front yard it inclosed
was yellow starred with the last jonquils of the season.  On the
front steps stood two women in black and behind them a large
yellow woman with her hands under her apron and her white teeth
showing in a wide smile.  Plump Miss Pittypat was teetering
excitedly on tiny feet, one hand pressed to her copious bosom to
still her fluttering heart.  Scarlett saw Melanie standing by her
and, with a surge of dislike, she realized that the fly in the
ointment of Atlanta would be this slight little person in black
mourning dress, her riotous dark curls subdued to matronly
smoothness and a loving smile of welcome and happiness on her
heart-shaped face.



When a Southerner took the trouble to pack a trunk and travel
twenty miles for a visit, the visit was seldom of shorter duration
than a month, usually much longer.  Southerners were as
enthusiastic visitors as they were hosts, and there was nothing
unusual in relatives coming to spend the Christmas holidays and
remaining until July.  Often when newly married couples went on
the usual round of honeymoon visits, they lingered in some
pleasant home until the birth of their second child.  Frequently
elderly aunts and uncles came to Sunday dinner and remained until
they were buried years later.  Visitors presented no problem, for
houses were large, servants numerous and the feeding of several
extra mouths a minor matter in that land of plenty.  All ages and
sexes went visiting, honeymooners, young mothers showing off new
babies, convalescents, the bereaved, girls whose parents were
anxious to remove them from the dangers of unwise matches, girls
who had reached the danger age without becoming engaged and who,
it was hoped, would make suitable matches under the guidance of
relatives in other places.  Visitors added excitement and variety
to the slow-moving Southern life and they were always welcome.

So Scarlett had come to Atlanta with no idea as to how long she
would remain.  If her visit proved as dull as those in Savannah
and Charleston, she would return home in a month.  If her stay was
pleasant, she would remain indefinitely.  But no sooner had she
arrived than Aunt Pitty and Melanie began a campaign to induce her
to make her home permanently with them.  They brought up every
possible argument.  They wanted her for her own self because they
loved her.  They were lonely and often frightened at night in the
big house, and she was so brave she gave them courage.  She was so
charming that she cheered them in their sorrow.  Now that Charles
was dead, her place and her son's place were with his kindred.
Besides, half the house now belonged to her, through Charles'
will.  Last, the Confederacy needed every pair of hands for
sewing, knitting, bandage rolling and nursing the wounded.

Charles' Uncle Henry Hamilton, who lived in bachelor state at the
Atlanta Hotel near the depot, also talked seriously to her on this
subject.  Uncle Henry was a short, pot-bellied, irascible old
gentleman with a pink face, a shock of long silver hair and an
utter lack of patience with feminine timidities and vaporings.  It
was for the latter reason that he was barely on speaking terms
with his sister, Miss Pittypat.  From childhood, they had been
exact opposites in temperament and they had been further estranged
by his objections to the manner in which she had reared Charles--
"Making a damn sissy out of a soldier's son!"  Years before, he
had so insulted her that now Miss Pitty never spoke of him except
in guarded whispers and with so great reticence that a stranger
would have thought the honest old lawyer a murderer, at the least.
The insult had occurred on a day when Pitty wished to draw five
hundred dollars from her estate, of which he was trustee, to
invest in a non-existent gold mine.  He had refused to permit it
and stated heatedly that she had no more sense than a June bug and
furthermore it gave him the fidgets to be around her longer than
five minutes.  Since that day, she only saw him formally, once a
month, when Uncle Peter drove her to his office to get the
housekeeping money.  After these brief visits, Pitty always took
to her bed for the rest of the day with tears and smelling salts.
Melanie and Charles, who were on excellent terms with their uncle,
had frequently offered to relieve her of this ordeal, but Pitty
always set her babyish mouth firmly and refused.  Henry was her
cross and she must bear him.  From this, Charles and Melanie could
only infer that she took a profound pleasure in this occasional
excitement, the only excitement in her sheltered life.

Uncle Henry liked Scarlett immediately because, he said, he could
see that for all her silly affectations she had a few grains of
sense.  He was trustee, not only of Pitty's and Melanie's estates,
but also of that left Scarlett by Charles.  It came to Scarlett as
a pleasant surprise that she was now a well-to-do young woman, for
Charles had not only left her half of Aunt Pitty's house but farm
lands and town property as well.  And the stores and warehouses
along the railroad track near the depot, which were part of her
inheritance, had tripled in value since the war began.  It was
when Uncle Henry was giving her an account of her property that he
broached the matter of her permanent residence in Atlanta.

"When Wade Hampton comes of age, he's going to be a rich young
man," he said.  "The way Atlanta is growing his property will be
ten times more valuable in twenty years, and it's only right that
the boy should be raised where his property is, so he can learn to
take care of it--yes, and of Pitty's and Melanie's, too.  He'll be
the only man of the Hamilton name left before long, for I won't be
here forever."

As for Uncle Peter, he took it for granted that Scarlett had come
to stay.  It was inconceivable to him that Charles' only son
should be reared where he could not supervise the rearing.  To all
these arguments, Scarlett smiled but said nothing, unwilling to
commit herself before learning how she would like Atlanta and
constant association with her in-laws.  She knew, too, that Gerald
and Ellen would have to be won over.  Moreover, now that she was
away from Tara, she missed it dreadfully, missed the red fields
and the springing green cotton and the sweet twilight silences.
For the first time, she realized dimly what Gerald had meant when
he said that the love of the land was in her blood.

So she gracefully evaded, for the time being, a definite answer as
to the duration of her visit and slipped easily into the life of
the red-brick house at the quiet end of Peachtree Street.

Living with Charles' blood kin, seeing the home from which he
came.  Scarlett could now understand a little better the boy who
had made her wife, widow and mother in such rapid succession.  It
was easy to see why he had been so shy, so unsophisticated, so
idealistic.  If Charles had inherited any of the qualities of the
stern, fearless, hot-tempered soldier who had been his father,
they had been obliterated in childhood by the ladylike atmosphere
in which he had been reared.  He had been devoted to the childlike
Pitty and closer than brothers usually are to Melanie, and two
more sweet, unworldly women could not be found.

Aunt Pittypat had been christened Sarah Jane Hamilton sixty years
before, but since the long-past day when her doting father had
fastened his nickname upon her, because of her airy, restless,
pattering little feet, no one had called her anything else.  In
the years that followed that second christening, many changes had
taken place in her that made the pet name incongruous.  Of the
swiftly scampering child, all that now remained were two tiny
feet, inadequate to her weight, and a tendency to prattle happily
and aimlessly.  She was stout, pink-cheeked and silver-haired and
always a little breathless from too tightly laced stays.  She was
unable to walk more than a block on the tiny feet which she
crammed into too small slippers.  She had a heart which fluttered
at any excitement and she pampered it shamelessly, fainting at any
provocation.  Everyone knew that her swoons were generally mere
ladylike pretenses but they loved her enough to refrain from
saying so.  Everyone loved her, spoiled her like a child and
refused to take her seriously--everyone except her brother Henry.

She liked gossip better than anything else in the world, even more
than she liked the pleasures of the table, and she prattled on for
hours about other people's affairs in a harmless kindly way.  She
had no memory for names, dates or places and frequently confused
the actors in one Atlanta drama with the actors in another, which
misled no one for no one was foolish enough to take seriously
anything she said.  No one ever told her anything really shocking
or scandalous, for her spinster state must be protected even if
she was sixty years old, and her friends were in a kindly
conspiracy to keep her a sheltered and petted old child.

Melanie was like her aunt in many ways.  She had her shyness, her
sudden blushes, her modesty, but she did have common sense--"Of a
sort, I'll admit that," Scarlett thought grudgingly.  Like Aunt
Pitty, Melanie had the face of a sheltered child who had never
known anything but simplicity and kindness, truth and love, a
child who had never looked upon harshness or evil and would not
recognize them if she saw them.  Because she had always been
happy, she wanted everyone about her to be happy or, at least,
pleased with themselves.  To this end, she always saw the best in
everyone and remarked kindly upon it.  There was no servant so
stupid that she did not find some redeeming trait of loyalty and
kind-heartedness, no girl so ugly and disagreeable that she could
not discover grace of form or nobility of character in her, and no
man so worthless or so boring that she did not view him in the
light of his possibilities rather than his actualities.

Because of these qualities that came sincerely and spontaneously
from a generous heart, everyone flocked about her, for who can
resist the charm of one who discovers in others admirable
qualities undreamed of even by himself?  She had more girl friends
than anyone in town and more men friends too, though she had few
beaux for she lacked the willfulness and selfishness that go far
toward trapping men's hearts.

What Melanie did was no more than all Southern girls were taught
to do--to make those about them feel at ease and pleased with
themselves.  It was this happy feminine conspiracy which made
Southern society so pleasant.  Women knew that a land where men
were contented, uncontradicted and safe in possession of
unpunctured vanity was likely to be a very pleasant place for
women to live.  So, from the cradle to the grave, women strove to
make men pleased with themselves, and the satisfied men repaid
lavishly with gallantry and adoration.  In fact, men willingly
gave the ladies everything in the world except credit for having
intelligence.  Scarlett exercised the same charms as Melanie but
with a studied artistry and consummate skill.  The difference
between the two girls lay in the fact that Melanie spoke kind and
flattering words from a desire to make people happy, if only
temporarily, and Scarlett never did it except to further her own
aims.

From the two he loved best, Charles had received no toughening
influences, learned nothing of harshness or reality, and the home
in which he grew to manhood was as soft as a bird's nest.  It was
such a quiet, old-fashioned, gentle home compared with Tara.  To
Scarlett, this house cried out for the masculine smells of brandy,
tobacco and Macassar oil, for hoarse voices and occasional curses,
for guns, for whiskers, for saddles and bridles and for hounds
underfoot.  She missed the sounds of quarreling voices that were
always heard at Tara when Ellen's back was turned, Mammy quarreling
with Pork, Rosa and Teena bickering, her own acrimonious arguments
with Suellen, Gerald's bawling threats.  No wonder Charles had been
a sissy, coming from a home like this.  Here, excitement never
entered in, voices were never raised, everyone deferred gently to
the opinions of others, and, in the end, the black grizzled autocrat
in the kitchen had his way.  Scarlett, who had hoped for a freer
rein when she escaped Mammy's supervision, discovered to her sorrow
that Uncle Peter's standards of ladylike conduct, especially for
Mist' Charles' widow, were even stricter than Mammy's.

In such a household, Scarlett came back to herself, and almost
before she realized it her spirits rose to normal.  She was only
seventeen, she had superb health and energy, and Charles' people
did their best to make her happy.  If they fell a little short of
this, it was not their fault, for no one could take out of her
heart the ache that throbbed whenever Ashley's name was mentioned.
And Melanie mentioned it so often!  But Melanie and Pitty were
tireless in planning ways to soothe the sorrow under which they
thought she labored.  They put their own grief into the background
in order to divert her.  They fussed about her food and her hours
for taking afternoon naps and for taking carriage rides.  They not
only admired her extravagantly, her high-spiritedness, her figure,
her tiny hands and feet, her white skin, but they said so
frequently, petting, hugging and kissing her to emphasize their
loving words.

Scarlett did not care for the caresses, but she basked in the
compliments.  No one at Tara had ever said so many charming things
about her.  In fact, Mammy had spent her time deflating her
conceit.  Little Wade was no longer an annoyance, for the family,
black and white, and the neighbors idolized him and there was a
never-ceasing rivalry as to whose lap he should occupy.  Melanie
especially doted on him.  Even in his worst screaming spells,
Melanie thought him adorable and said so, adding, "Oh, you
precious darling!  I just wish you were mine!"

Sometimes Scarlett found it hard to dissemble her feelings, for
she still thought Aunt Pitty the silliest of old ladies and her
vagueness and vaporings irritated her unendurably.  She disliked
Melanie with a jealous dislike that grew as the days went by, and
sometimes she had to leave the room abruptly when Melanie, beaming
with loving pride, spoke of Ashley or read his letters aloud.
But, all in all, life went on as happily as was possible under the
circumstances.  Atlanta was more interesting than Savannah or
Charleston or Tara and it offered so many strange war-time
occupations she had little time to think or mope.  But, sometimes,
when she blew out the candle and burrowed her head into the
pillow, she sighed and thought:  "If only Ashley wasn't married!
If only I didn't have to nurse in that plagued hospital!  Oh, if
only I could have some beaux!"

She had immediately loathed nursing but she could not escape this
duty because she was on both Mrs. Meade's and Mrs. Merriwether's
committees.  That meant four mornings a week in the sweltering,
stinking hospital with her hair tied up in a towel and a hot apron
covering her from neck to feet.  Every matron, old or young, in
Atlanta nursed and did it with an enthusiasm that seemed to
Scarlett little short of fanatic.  They took it for granted that
she was imbued with their own patriotic fervor and would have been
shocked to know how slight an interest in the war she had.  Except
for the ever-present torment that Ashley might be killed, the war
interested her not at all, and nursing was something she did
simply because she didn't know how to get out of it.

Certainly there was nothing romantic about nursing.  To her, it
meant groans, delirium, death and smells.  The hospitals were
filled with dirty, bewhiskered, verminous men who smelled terribly
and bore on their bodies wounds hideous enough to turn a
Christian's stomach.  The hospitals stank of gangrene, the odor
assaulting her nostrils long before the doors were reached, a
sickish sweet smell that clung to her hands and hair and haunted
her in her dreams.  Flies, mosquitoes and gnats hovered in
droning, singing swarms over the wards, tormenting the men to
curses and weak sobs; and Scarlett, scratching her own mosquito
bites, swung palmetto fans until her shoulders ached and she
wished that all the men were dead.

Melanie, however, did not seem to mind the smells, the wounds or
the nakedness, which Scarlett thought strange in one who was the
most timorous and modest of women.  Sometimes when holding basins
and instruments while Dr. Meade cut out gangrened flesh, Melanie
looked very white.  And once, alter such an operation, Scarlett
found her in the linen closet vomiting quietly into a towel.  But
as long as she was where the wounded could see her, she was
gentle, sympathetic and cheerful, and the men in the hospitals
called her an angel of mercy.  Scarlett would have liked that
title too, but it involved touching men crawling with lice,
running fingers down throats of unconscious patients to see if
they were choking on swallowed tobacco quids, bandaging stumps and
picking maggots out of festering flesh.  No, she did not like
nursing!

Perhaps it might have been endurable if she had been permitted to
use her charms on the convalescent men, for many of them were
attractive and well born, but this she could not do in her widowed
state.  The young ladies of the town, who were not permitted to
nurse for fear they would see sights unfit for virgin eyes, had
the convalescent wards in their charge.  Unhampered by matrimony
or widowhood, they made vast inroads on the convalescents, and
even the least attractive girls, Scarlett observed gloomily, had
no difficulty in getting engaged.

With the exception of desperately ill and severely wounded men,
Scarlett's was a completely feminized world and this irked her,
for she neither liked nor trusted her own sex and, worse still,
was always bored by it.  But on three afternoons a week she had to
attend sewing circles and bandage-rolling committees of Melanie's
friends.  The girls who had all known Charles were very kind and
attentive to her at these gatherings, especially Fanny Elsing and
Maybelle Merriwether, the daughters of the town dowagers.  But
they treated her deferentially, as if she were old and finished,
and their constant chatter of dances and beaux made her both
envious of their pleasures and resentful that her widowhood barred
her from such activities.  Why, she was three times as attractive
as Fanny and Maybelle!  Oh, how unfair life was!  How unfair that
everyone should think her heart was in the grave when it wasn't at
all!  It was in Virginia with Ashley!

But in spite of these discomforts, Atlanta pleased her very well.
And her visit lengthened as the weeks slipped by.



CHAPTER IX


Scarlett sat in the window of her bedroom that midsummer morning
and disconsolately watched the wagons and carriages full of girls,
soldiers and chaperons ride gaily out Peachtree road in search of
woodland decorations for the bazaar which was to be held that
evening for the benefit of the hospitals.  The red road lay
checkered in shade and sun glare beneath the over-arching trees
and the many hooves kicked up little red clouds of dust.  One
wagon, ahead of the others, bore four stout negroes with axes to
cut evergreens and drag down the vines, and the back of this wagon
was piled high with napkin-covered hampers, split-oak baskets of
lunch and a dozen watermelons.  Two of the black bucks were
equipped with banjo and harmonica and they were rendering a
spirited version of "If You Want to Have a Good Time, Jine the
Cavalry."  Behind them streamed the merry cavalcade, girls cool in
flowered cotton dresses, with light shawls, bonnets and mitts to
protect their skins and little parasols held over their heads;
elderly ladies placid and smiling amid the laughter and carriage-
to-carriage calls and jokes; convalescents from the hospitals
wedged in between stout chaperons and slender girls who made great
fuss and to-do over them; officers on horseback idling at snail's
pace beside the carriages--wheels creaking, spurs jingling, gold
braid gleaming, parasols bobbing, fans swishing, negroes singing.
Everybody was riding out Peachtree road to gather greenery and
have a picnic and melon cutting.  Everybody, thought Scarlett,
morosely, except me.

They all waved and called to her as they went by and she tried to
respond with a good grace, but it was difficult.  A hard little
pain had started in her heart and was traveling slowly up toward
her throat where it would become a lump and the lump would soon
become tears.  Everybody was going to the picnic except her.  And
everybody was going to the bazaar and the ball tonight except her.
That is everybody except her and Pittypat and Melly and the other
unfortunates in town who were in mourning.  But Melly and Pittypat
did not seem to mind.  It had not even occurred to them to want to
go.  It had occurred to Scarlett.  And she did want to go,
tremendously.

It simply wasn't fair.  She had worked twice as hard as any girl
in town, getting things ready for the bazaar.  She had knitted
socks and baby caps and afghans and mufflers and tatted yards of
lace and painted china hair receivers and mustache cups.  And she
had embroidered half a dozen sofa-pillow cases with the
Confederate flag on them.  (The stars were a bit lopsided, to be
sure, some of them being almost round and others having six or
even seven points, but the effect was good.)  Yesterday she had
worked until she was worn out in the dusty old barn of an Armory
draping yellow and pink and green cheesecloth on the booths that
lined the walls.  Under the supervision of the Ladies' Hospital
Committee, this was plain hard work and no fun at all.  It was
never fun to be around Mrs. Merriwether and Mrs. Elsing and Mrs.
Whiting and have them boss you like you were one of the darkies.
And have to listen to them brag about how popular their daughters
were.  And, worst of all, she had burned two blisters on her
fingers helping Pittypat and Cookie make layer cakes for raffling.

And now, having worked like a field hand, she had to retire
decorously when the fun was just beginning.  Oh, it wasn't fair
that she should have a dead husband and a baby yelling in the next
room and be out of everything that was pleasant.  Just a little
over a year ago, she was dancing and wearing bright clothes
instead of this dark mourning and was practically engaged to three
boys.  She was only seventeen now and there was still a lot of
dancing left in her feet.  Oh, it wasn't fair!  Life was going
past her, down a hot shady summer road, life with gray uniforms
and jingling spurs and flowered organdie dresses and banjos
playing.  She tried not to smile and wave too enthusiastically to
the men she knew best, the ones she'd nursed in the hospital, but
it was hard to subdue her dimples, hard to look as though her
heart were in the grave--when it wasn't.

Her bowing and waving were abruptly halted when Pittypat entered
the room, panting as usual from climbing the stairs, and jerked
her away from the window unceremoniously.

"Have you lost your mind, honey, waving at men out of your bedroom
window?  I declare, Scarlett, I'm shocked!  What would your mother
say?"

"Well, they didn't know it was my bedroom."

"But they'd suspect it was your bedroom and that's just as bad.
Honey, you mustn't do things like that.  Everybody will be talking
about you and saying you are fast--and anyway, Mrs. Merriwether
knew it was your bedroom."

"And I suppose she'll tell all the boys, the old cat."

"Honey, hush!  Dolly Merriwether's my best friend."

"Well, she's a cat just the same--oh, I'm sorry, Auntie, don't
cry!  I forgot it was my bedroom window.  I won't do it again--I--
I just wanted to see them go by.  I wish I was going."

"Honey!"

"Well, I do.  I'm so tired of sitting at home."

"Scarlett, promise me you won't say things like that.  People
would talk so.  They'd say you didn't have the proper respect for
poor Charlie--"

"Oh, Auntie, don't cry!"

"Oh, now I've made you cry, too," sobbed Pittypat, in a pleased
way, fumbling in her skirt pocket for her handkerchief.

The hard little pain had at last reached Scarlett's throat and she
wailed out loud--not, as Pittypat thought, for poor Charlie but
because the last sounds of the wheels and the laughter were dying
away.  Melanie rustled in from her room, a worried frown puckering
her forehead, a brush in her hands, her usually tidy black hair,
freed of its net, fluffing about her face in a mass of tiny curls
and waves.

"Darlings!  What is the matter?"

"Charlie!" sobbed Pittypat, surrendering utterly to the pleasure
of her grief and burying her head on Melly's shoulder.

"Oh," said Melly, her lip quivering at the mention of her
brother's name.  "Be brave, dear.  Don't cry.  Oh, Scarlett!"

Scarlett had thrown herself on the bed and was sobbing at the top
of her voice, sobbing for her lost youth and the pleasures of
youth that were denied her, sobbing with the indignation and
despair of a child who once could get anything she wanted by
sobbing and now knows that sobbing can no longer help her.  She
burrowed her head in the pillow and cried and kicked her feet at
the tufted counterpane.

"I might as well be dead!" she sobbed passionately.  Before such
an exhibition of grief, Pittypat's easy tears ceased and Melly
flew to the bedside to comfort her sister-in-law.

"Dear, don't cry!  Try to think how much Charlie loved you and let
that comfort you!  Try to think of your darling baby."

Indignation at being misunderstood mingled with Scarlett's forlorn
feeling of being out of everything and strangled all utterance.
That was fortunate, for if she could have spoken she would have
cried out truths couched in Gerald's forthright words.  Melanie
patted her shoulder and Pittypat tiptoed heavily about the room
pulling down the shades.

"Don't do that!" shouted Scarlett, raising a red and swollen face
from the pillow.  "I'm not dead enough for you to pull down the
shades--though I might as well be.  Oh, do go away and leave me
alone!"

She sank her face into the pillow again and, after a whispered
conference, the two standing over her tiptoed out.  She heard
Melanie say to Pittypat in a low voice as they went down the
stairs:

"Aunt Pitty, I wish you wouldn't speak of Charles to her.  You
know how it always affects her.  Poor thing, she gets that queer
look and I know she's trying not to cry.  We mustn't make it
harder for her."

Scarlett kicked the coverlet in impotent rage, trying to think of
something bad enough to say.

"God's nightgown!" she cried at last, and felt somewhat relieved.
How could Melanie be content to stay at home and never have any
fun and wear crepe for her brother when she was only eighteen
years old?  Melanie did not seem to know, or care, that life was
riding by with jingling spurs.

"But she's such a stick," thought Scarlett, pounding the pillow.
"And she never was popular like me, so she doesn't miss the things
I miss.  And--and besides she's got Ashley and I--I haven't got
anybody!"  And at this fresh woe, she broke into renewed outcries.

She remained gloomily in her room until afternoon and then the
sight of the returning picnickers with wagons piled high with pine
boughs, vines and ferns did not cheer her.  Everyone looked
happily tired as they waved to her again and she returned their
greetings drearily.  Life was a hopeless affair and certainly not
worth living.

Deliverance came in the form she least expected when, during the
after-dinner-nap period, Mrs. Merriwether and Mrs. Elsing drove
up.  Startled at having callers at such an hour, Melanie, Scarlett
and Aunt Pittypat roused themselves, hastily hooked their basques,
smoothed their hair and descended to the parlor.

"Mrs. Bonnell's children have the measles," said Mrs. Merriwether
abruptly, showing plainly that she held Mrs. Bonnell personally
responsible for permitting such a thing to happen.

"And the McLure girls have been called to Virginia," said Mrs.
Elsing in her die-away voice, fanning herself languidly as if
neither this nor anything else mattered very much.  "Dallas McLure
is wounded."

"How dreadful!" chorused their hostesses.  "Is poor Dallas--"

"No.  Just through the shoulder," said Mrs. Merriwether briskly.
"But it couldn't possibly have happened at a worse time.  The
girls are going North to bring him home.  But, skies above, we
haven't time to sit here talking.  We must hurry back to the
Armory and get the decorating done.  Pitty, we need you and Melly
tonight to take Mrs. Bonnell's and the McLure girls' places."

"Oh, but, Dolly, we can't go."

"Don't say 'can't' to me, Pittypat Hamilton," said Mrs.
Merriwether vigorously.  "We need you to watch the darkies with
the refreshments.  That was what Mrs. Bonnell was to do.  And
Melly, you must take the McLure girls' booth."

"Oh, we just couldn't--with poor Charlie dead only a--"

"I know how you feel but there isn't any sacrifice too great for
the Cause," broke in Mrs. Elsing in a soft voice that settled
matters.

"Oh, we'd love to help but--why can't you get some sweet pretty
girls to take the booths?"

Mrs. Merriwether snorted a trumpeting snort.

"I don't know what's come over the young people these days.  They
have no sense of responsibility.  All the girls who haven't
already taken booths have more excuses than you could shake a
stick at.  Oh, they don't fool me!  They just don't want to be
hampered in making up to the officers, that's all.  And they're
afraid their new dresses won't show off behind booth counters.  I
wish to goodness that blockade runner--what's his name?"

"Captain Butler," supplied Mrs. Elsing.

"I wish he'd bring in more hospital supplies and less hoop skirts
and lace.  If I've had to look at one dress today I've had to look
at twenty dresses that he ran in.  Captain Butler--I'm sick of the
name.  Now, Pitty, I haven't time to argue.  You must come.
Everybody will understand.  Nobody will see you in the back room
anyway, and Melly won't be conspicuous.  The poor McLure girls'
booth is way down at the end and not very pretty so nobody will
notice you."

"I think we should go," said Scarlett, trying to curb her
eagerness and to keep her face earnest and simple.  "It is the
least we can do for the hospital."

Neither of the visiting ladies had even mentioned her name, and
they turned and looked sharply at her.  Even in their extremity,
they had not considered asking a widow of scarcely a year to
appear at a social function.  Scarlett bore their gaze with a
wide-eyed childlike expression.

"I think we should go and help to make it a success, all of us.  I
think I should go in the booth with Melly because--well, I think
it would look better for us both to be there instead of just one.
Don't you think so, Melly?"

"Well," began Melly helplessly.  The idea of appearing publicly at
a social gathering while in mourning was so unheard of she was
bewildered.

"Scarlett's right," said Mrs. Merriwether, observing signs of
weakening.  She rose and jerked her hoops into place.  "Both of
you--all of you must come.  Now, Pitty, don't start your excuses
again.  Just think how much the hospital needs money for new beds
and drugs.  And I know Charlie would like you to help the Cause he
died for."

"Well," said Pittypat, helpless as always in the presence of a
stronger personality, "if you think people will understand."

"Too good to be true!  Too good to be true!" said Scarlett's joyful
heart as she slipped unobtrusively into the pink-and-yellow-draped
booth that was to have been the McLure girls'.  Actually she was
at a party!  After a year's seclusion, after crepe and hushed voices
and nearly going crazy with boredom, she was actually at a party,
the biggest party Atlanta had ever seen.  And she could see people
and many lights and hear music and view for herself the lovely laces
and frocks and frills that the famous Captain Butler had run through
the blockade on his last trip.

She sank down on one of the little stools behind the counter of
the booth and looked up and down the long hall which, until this
afternoon, had been a bare and ugly drill room.  How the ladies
must have worked today to bring it to its present beauty.  It
looked lovely.  Every candle and candlestick in Atlanta must be in
this hall tonight, she thought, silver ones with a dozen
sprangling arms, china ones with charming figurines clustering
their bases, old brass stands, erect and dignified, laden with
candles of all sizes and colors, smelling fragrantly of
bayberries, standing on the gun racks that ran the length of the
hall, on the long flower-decked tables, on booth counters, even on
the sills of the open windows where the draughts of warm summer
air were just strong enough to make them flare.

In the center of the hall the huge ugly lamp, hanging from the
ceiling by rusty chains, was completely transformed by twining ivy
and wild grapevines that were already withering from the heat.
The walls were banked with pine branches that gave out a spicy
smell, making the corners of the room into pretty bowers where the
chaperons and old ladies would sit.  Long graceful ropes of ivy
and grapevine and smilax were hung everywhere, in looping festoons
on the walls, draped above the windows, twined in scallops all
over the brightly colored cheesecloth booths.  And everywhere amid
the greenery, on flags and bunting, blazed the bright stars of the
Confederacy on their background of red and blue.

The raised platform for the musicians was especially artistic.  It
was completely hidden from view by the banked greenery and starry
bunting and Scarlett knew that every potted and tubbed plant in
town was there, coleus, geranium, hydrangea, oleander, elephant
ear--even Mrs. Elsing's four treasured rubber plants, which were
given posts of honor at the four corners.

At the other end of the hall from the platform, the ladies had
eclipsed themselves.  On this wall hung large pictures of
President Davis and Georgia's own "Little Alec" Stephens, Vice-
President of the Confederacy.  Above them was an enormous flag
and, beneath, on long tables was the loot of the gardens of the
town, ferns, banks of roses, crimson and yellow and white, proud
sheaths of golden gladioli, masses of varicolored nasturtiums,
tall stiff hollyhocks rearing deep maroon and creamy heads above
the other flowers.  Among them, candles burned serenely like altar
fires.  The two faces looked down on the scene, two faces as
different as could be possible in two men at the helm of so
momentous an undertaking: Davis with the flat cheeks and cold eyes
of an ascetic, his thin proud lips set firmly; Stephens with dark
burning eyes deep socketed in a face that had known nothing but
sickness and pain and had triumphed over them with humor and with
fire--two faces that were greatly loved.

The elderly ladies of the committee in whose hands rested the
responsibility for the whole bazaar rustled in as importantly as
full-rigged ships, hurried the belated young matrons and giggling
girls into their booths, and then swept through the doors into the
back rooms where the refreshments were being laid out.  Aunt Pitty
panted out after them.

The musicians clambered upon their platform, black, grinning,
their fat cheeks already shining with perspiration, and began
tuning their fiddles and sawing and whanging with their bows in
anticipatory importance.  Old Levi, Mrs. Merriwether's coachman,
who had led the orchestras for every bazaar, ball and wedding
since Atlanta was named Marthasville, rapped with his bow for
attention.  Few except the ladies who were conducting the bazaar
had arrived yet, but all eyes turned toward him.  Then the
fiddles, bull fiddles, accordions, banjos and knuckle-bones broke
into a slow rendition of "Lorena"--too slow for dancing, the
dancing would come later when the booths were emptied of their
wares.  Scarlett felt her heart beat faster as the sweet
melancholy of the waltz came to her:


"The years creep slowly by, Lorena!
The snow is on the grass again.
The sun's far down the sky, Lorena . . ."


One-two-three, one-two-three, dip-sway--three, turn--two-three.
What a beautiful waltz!  She extended her hands slightly, closed
her eyes and swayed with the sad haunting rhythm.  There was
something about the tragic melody and Lorena's lost love that
mingled with her own excitement and brought a lump into her
throat.

Then, as if brought into being by the waltz music, sounds floated
in from the shadowy moonlit street below, the trample of horses'
hooves and the sound of carriage wheels, laughter on the warm
sweet air and the soft acrimony of negro voices raised in argument
over hitching places for the horses.  There was confusion on the
stairs and light-hearted merriment, the mingling of girls' fresh
voices with the bass notes of their escorts, airy cries of
greeting and squeals of joy as girls recognized friends from whom
they had parted only that afternoon.

Suddenly the hall burst into life.  It was full of girls, girls
who floated in butterfly bright dresses, hooped out enormously,
lace pantalets peeping from beneath; round little white shoulders
bare, and faintest traces of soft little bosoms showing above lace
flounces; lace shawls carelessly hanging from arms; fans spangled
and painted, fans of swan's-down and peacock feathers, dangling at
wrists by tiny velvet ribbons; girls with masses of golden curls
about their necks and fringed gold earbobs that tossed and danced
with their dancing curls.  Laces and silks and braid and ribbons,
all blockade run, all the more precious and more proudly worn
because of it, finery flaunted with an added pride as an extra
affront to the Yankees.

Not all the flowers of the town were standing in tribute to the
leaders of the Confederacy.  The smallest, the most fragrant
blossoms bedecked the girls.  Tea roses tucked behind pink ears,
cape jessamine and bud roses in round little garlands over
cascades of side curls, blossoms thrust demurely into satin
sashes, flowers that before the night was over would find their
way into the breast pockets of gray uniforms as treasured
souvenirs.

There were so many uniforms in the crowd--so many uniforms on so
many men whom Scarlett knew, men she had met on hospital cots, on
the streets, at the drill ground.  They were such resplendent
uniforms, brave with shining buttons and dazzling with twined gold
braid on cuffs and collars, the red and yellow and blue stripes on
the trousers, for the different branches of the service, setting
off the gray to perfection.  Scarlet and gold sashes swung to and
fro, sabers glittered and banged against shining boots, spurs
rattled and jingled.

Such handsome men, thought Scarlett, with a swell of pride in her
heart, as the men called greetings, waved to friends, bent low
over the hands of elderly ladies.  All of them were so young
looking, even with their sweeping yellow mustaches and full black
and brown beards, so handsome, so reckless, with their arms in
slings, with head bandages startlingly white across sun-browned
faces.  Some of them were on crutches and how proud were the girls
who solicitously slowed their steps to their escorts' hopping
pace!  There was one gaudy splash of color among the uniforms that
put the girls' bright finery to shame and stood out in the crowd
like a tropical bird--a Louisiana Zouave, with baggy blue and
white striped pants, cream gaiters and tight little red jacket, a
dark, grinning little monkey of a man, with his arm in a black
silk sling.  He was Maybelle Merriwether's especial beau, Rene
Picard.  The whole hospital must have turned out, at least
everybody who could walk, and all the men on furlough and sick
leave and all the railroad and mail service and hospital and
commissary departments between here and Macon.  How pleased the
ladies would be!  The hospital should make a mint of money
tonight.

There was a ruffle of drums from the street below, the tramp of
feet, the admiring cries of coachmen.  A bugle blared and a bass
voice shouted the command to break ranks.  In a moment, the Home
Guard and the militia unit in their bright uniforms shook the
narrow stairs and crowded into the room, bowing, saluting, shaking
hands.  There were boys in the Home Guard, proud to be playing at
war, promising themselves they would be in Virginia this time next
year, if the war would just last that long; old men with white
beards, wishing they were younger, proud to march in uniform in
the reflected glory of sons at the front.  In the militia, there
were many middle-aged men and some older men but there was a fair
sprinkling of men of military age who did not carry themselves
quite so jauntily as their elders or their juniors.  Already
people were beginning to whisper, asking why they were not with
Lee.

How would they all get into the hall!  It had seemed such a large
place a few minutes before, and now it was packed, warm with
summer-night odors of sachet and cologne water and hair pomade and
burning bayberry candles, fragrant with flowers, faintly dusty as
many feet trod the old drill floors.  The din and hubbub of voices
made it almost impossible to hear anything and, as if feeling the
joy and excitement of the occasion, old Levi choked off "Lorena"
in mid-bar, rapped sharply with his bow and, sawing away for dear
life, the orchestra burst into "Bonnie Blue Flag."

A hundred voices took it up, sang it, shouted it like a cheer.
The Home Guard bugler, climbing onto the platform, caught up with
the music just as the chorus began, and the high silver notes
soared out thrillingly above the massed singing, causing goose
bumps to break out on bare arms and cold chills of deeply felt
emotion to fly down spines:


"Hurrah!  Hurrah!  For the Southern Rights, hurrah!
Hurrah for the Bonnie Blue Flag
That bears a single star!"


They crashed into the second verse and Scarlett, singing with the
rest, heard the high sweet soprano of Melanie mounting behind her,
clear and true and thrilling as the bugle notes.  Turning, she saw
that Melly was standing with her hands clasped to her breast, her
eyes closed, and tiny tears oozing from the corners.  She smiled
at Scarlett, whimsically, as the music ended, making a little moue
of apology as she dabbed with her handkerchief.

"I'm so happy," she whispered, "and so proud of the soldiers that
I just can't help crying about it."

There was a deep, almost fanatic glow in her eyes that for a
moment lit up her plain little face and made it beautiful.

The same look was on the faces of all the women as the song ended,
tears of pride on cheeks, pink or wrinkled, smiles on lips, a deep
hot glow in eyes, as they turned to their men, sweetheart to
lover, mother to son, wife to husband.  They were all beautiful
with the blinding beauty that transfigures even the plainest woman
when she is utterly protected and utterly loved and is giving back
that love a thousandfold.

They loved their men, they believed in them, they trusted them to
the last breaths of their bodies.  How could disaster ever come to
women such as they when their stalwart gray line stood between
them and the Yankees?  Had there ever been such men as these since
the first dawn of the world, so heroic, so reckless, so gallant,
so tender?  How could anything but overwhelming victory come to a
Cause as just and right as theirs?  A Cause they loved as much as
they loved their men, a Cause they served with their hands and
their hearts, a Cause they talked about, thought about, dreamed
about--a Cause to which they would sacrifice these men if need be,
and bear their loss as proudly as the men bore their battle flags.

It was high tide of devotion and pride in their hearts, high tide
of the Confederacy, for final victory was at hand.  Stonewall
Jackson's triumphs in the Valley and the defeat of the Yankees in
the Seven Days' Battle around Richmond showed that clearly.  How
could it be otherwise with such leaders as Lee and Jackson?  One
more victory and the Yankees would be on their knees yelling for
peace and the men would be riding home and there would be kissing
and laughter.  One more victory and the war was over!

Of course, there were empty chairs and babies who would never see
their fathers' faces and unmarked graves by lonely Virginia creeks
and in the still mountains of Tennessee, but was that too great a
price to pay for such a Cause?  Silks for the ladies and tea and
sugar were hard to get, but that was something to joke about.
Besides, the dashing blockade runners were bringing in these very
things under the Yankees' disgruntled noses, and that made the
possession of them many times more thrilling.  Soon Raphael Semmes
and the Confederate Navy would tend to those Yankee gunboats and
the ports would be wide open.  And England was coming in to help
the Confederacy win the war, because the English mills were
standing idle for want of Southern cotton.  And naturally the
British aristocracy sympathized with the Confederacy, as one
aristocrat with another, against a race of dollar lovers like the
Yankees.

So the women swished their silks and laughed and, looking on their
men with hearts bursting with pride, they knew that love snatched
in the face of danger and death was doubly sweet for the strange
excitement that went with it.

When first she looked at the crowd, Scarlett's heart had thump-
thumped with the unaccustomed excitement of being at a party, but
as she half-comprehendingly saw the high-hearted look on the faces
about her, her joy began to evaporate.  Every woman present was
blazing with an emotion she did not feel.  It bewildered and
depressed her.  Somehow, the ball did not seem so pretty nor the
girls so dashing, and the white heat of devotion to the Cause that
was still shining on every face seemed--why, it just seemed silly!

In a sudden flash of self-knowledge that made her mouth pop open
with astonishment, she realized that she did not share with these
women their fierce pride, their desire to sacrifice themselves and
everything they had for the Cause.  Before horror made her think:
"No--no!  I mustn't think such things!  They're wrong--sinful,"
she knew the Cause meant nothing at all to her and that she was
bored with hearing other people talk about it with that fanatic
look in their eyes.  The Cause didn't seem sacred to her.  The war
didn't seem to be a holy affair, but a nuisance that killed men
senselessly and cost money and made luxuries hard to get.  She saw
that she was tired of the endless knitting and the endless bandage
rolling and lint picking that roughened the cuticle of her nails.
And oh, she was so tired of the hospital!  Tired and bored and
nauseated with the sickening gangrene smells and the endless
moaning, frightened by the look that coming death gave to sunken
faces.

She looked furtively around her, as the treacherous, blasphemous
thoughts rushed through her mind, fearful that someone might find
them written clearly upon her face.  Oh, why couldn't she feel
like those other women!  They were whole hearted and sincere in
their devotion to the Cause.  They really meant everything they
said and did.  And if anyone should ever suspect that she--  No,
no one must ever know!  She must go on making a pretense of
enthusiasm and pride in the Cause which she could not feel, acting
out her part of the widow of a Confederate officer who bears her
grief bravely, whose heart is in the grave, who feels that her
husband's death meant nothing if it aided the Cause to triumph.

Oh, why was she different, apart from these loving women?  She
could never love anything or anyone so selflessly as they did.
What a lonely feeling it was--and she had never been lonely either
in body or spirit before.  At first she tried to stifle the
thoughts, but the hard self-honesty that lay at the base of her
nature would not permit it.  And so, while the bazaar went on,
while she and Melanie waited on the customers who came to their
booth, her mind was busily working, trying to justify herself to
herself--a task which she seldom found difficult.

The other women were simply silly and hysterical with their talk
of patriotism and the Cause, and the men were almost as bad with
their talk of vital issues and States' Rights.  She, Scarlett
O'Hara Hamilton, alone had good hard-headed Irish sense.  She
wasn't going to make a fool out of herself about the Cause, but
neither was she going to make a fool out of herself by admitting
her true feelings.  She was hard-headed enough to be practical
about the situation, and no one would ever know how she felt.  How
surprised the bazaar would be if they knew what she really was
thinking!  How shocked if she suddenly climbed on the bandstand
and declared that she thought the war ought to stop, so everybody
could go home and tend to their cotton and there could be parties
and beaux again and plenty of pale green dresses.

For a moment, her self-justification buoyed her up but still she
looked about the hall with distaste.  The McLure girls' booth was
inconspicuous, as Mrs. Merriwether had said, and there were long
intervals when no one came to their corner and Scarlett had
nothing to do but look enviously on the happy throng.  Melanie
sensed her moodiness but, crediting it to longing for Charlie, did
not try to engage her in conversation.  She busied herself
arranging the articles in the booth in more attractive display,
while Scarlett sat and looked glumly around the room.  Even the
banked flowers below the pictures of Mr. Davis and Mr. Stephens
displeased her.

"It looks like an altar," she sniffed.  "And the way they all
carry on about those two, they might as well be the Father and the
Son!"  Then smitten with sudden fright at her irreverence she
began hastily to cross herself by way of apology but caught
herself in time.

"Well, it's true," she argued with her conscience.  "Everybody
carries on like they were holy and they aren't anything but men,
and mighty unattractive looking ones at that."

Of course, Mr. Stephens couldn't help how he looked for he had
been an invalid all his life, but Mr. Davis--  She looked up at
the cameo clean, proud face.  It was his goatee that annoyed her
the most.  Men should either be clean shaven, mustached or wear
full beards.

"That little wisp looks like it was just the best he could do,"
she thought, not seeing in his face the cold hard intelligence
that was carrying the weight of a new nation.

No, she was not happy now, and at first she had been radiant with
the pleasure of being in a crowd.  Now just being present was not
enough.  She was at the bazaar but not a part of it.  No one paid
her any attention and she was the only young unmarried woman
present who did not have a beau.  And all her life she had enjoyed
the center of the stage.  It wasn't fair!  She was seventeen years
old and her feet were patting the floor, wanting to skip and
dance.  She was seventeen years old and she had a husband lying at
Oakland Cemetery and a baby in his cradle at Aunt Pittypat's and
everyone thought she should be content with her lot.  She had a
whiter bosom and a smaller waist and a tinier foot than any girl
present, but for all they mattered she might just as well be lying
beside Charles with "Beloved Wife of" carved over her.

She wasn't a girl who could dance and flirt and she wasn't a wife
who could sit with other wives and criticize the dancing and
flirting girls.  And she wasn't old enough to be a widow.  Widows
should be old--so terribly old they didn't want to dance and flirt
and be admired.  Oh, it wasn't fair that she should have to sit
here primly and be the acme of widowed dignity and propriety when
she was only seventeen.  It wasn't fair that she must keep her
voice low and her eyes cast modestly down, when men, attractive
ones, too, came to their booth.

Every girl in Atlanta was three deep in men.  Even the plainest
girls were carrying on like belles--and, oh, worst of all, they
were carrying on in such lovely, lovely dresses!

Here she sat like a crow with hot black taffeta to her wrists and
buttoned up to her chin, with not even a hint of lace or braid,
not a jewel except Ellen's onyx mourning brooch, watching tacky-
looking girls hanging on the arms of good-looking men.  All
because Charles Hamilton had had the measles.  He didn't even die
in a fine glow of gallantry in battle, so she could brag about
him.

Rebelliously she leaned her elbows on the counter and looked at
the crowd, flouting Mammy's oft-repeated admonition against
leaning on elbows and making them ugly and wrinkled.  What did it
matter if they did get ugly?  She'd probably never get a chance to
show them again.  She looked hungrily at the frocks floating by,
butter-yellow watered silks with garlands of rosebuds; pink satins
with eighteen flounces edged with tiny black velvet ribbons; baby
blue taffeta, ten yards in the skirt and foamy with cascading
lace; exposed bosoms; seductive flowers.  Maybelle Merriwether
went toward the next booth on the arm of the Zouave, in an apple-
green tarlatan so wide that it reduced her waist to nothingness.
It was showered and flounced with cream-colored Chantilly lace
that had come from Charleston on the last blockader, and Maybelle
was flaunting it as saucily as if she and not the famous Captain
Butler had run the blockade.

"How sweet I'd look in that dress," thought Scarlett, a savage
envy in her heart.  "Her waist is as big as a cow's.  That green
is just my color and it would make my eyes look--  Why will
blondes try to wear that color?  Her skin looks as green as an old
cheese.  And to think I'll never wear that color again, not even
when I do get out of mourning.  No, not even if I do manage to get
married again.  Then I'll have to wear tacky old grays and tans
and lilacs."

For a brief moment she considered the unfairness of it all.  How
short was the time for fun, for pretty clothes, for dancing, for
coquetting!  Only a few, too few years!  Then you married and wore
dull-colored dresses and had babies that ruined your waist line
and sat in corners at dances with other sober matrons and only
emerged to dance with your husband or with old gentlemen who
stepped on your feet.  If you didn't do these things, the other
matrons talked about you and then your reputation was ruined and
your family disgraced.  It seemed such a terrible waste to spend
all your little girlhood learning how to be attractive and how to
catch men and then only use the knowledge for a year or two.  When
she considered her training at the hands of Ellen and Mammy, she
knew it had been thorough and good because it had always reaped
results.  There were set rules to be followed, and if you followed
them success crowned your efforts.

With old ladies you were sweet and guileless and appeared as
simple minded as possible, for old ladies were sharp and they
watched girls as jealously as cats, ready to pounce on any
indiscretion of tongue or eye.  With old gentlemen, a girl was
pert and saucy and almost, but not quite, flirtatious, so that the
old fools' vanities would be tickled.  It made them feel devilish
and young and they pinched your cheek and declared you were a
minx.  And, of course, you always blushed on such occasions,
otherwise they would pinch you with more pleasure than was proper
and then tell their sons that you were fast.

With young girls and young married women, you slopped over with
sugar and kissed them every time you met them, even if it was ten
times a day.  And you put your arms about their waists and
suffered them to do the same to you, no matter how much you
disliked it.  You admired their frocks or their babies
indiscriminately and teased about beaux and complimented husbands
and giggled modestly and denied that you had any charms at all
compared with theirs.  And, above all, you never said what you
really thought about anything, any more than they said what they
really thought.

Other women's husbands you let severely alone, even if they were
your own discarded beaux, and no matter how temptingly attractive
they were.  If you were too nice to young husbands, their wives
said you were fast and you got a bad reputation and never caught
any beaux of your own.

But with young bachelors--ah, that was a different matter!  You
could laugh softly at them and when they came flying to see why
you laughed, you could refuse to tell them and laugh harder and
keep them around indefinitely trying to find out.  You could
promise, with your eyes, any number of exciting things that would
make a man maneuver to get you alone.  And, having gotten you
alone, you could be very, very hurt or very, very angry when he
tried to kiss you.  You could make him apologize for being a cur
and forgive him so sweetly that he would hang around trying to
kiss you a second time.  Sometimes, but not often, you did let him
kiss you.  (Ellen and Mammy had not taught her that but she
learned it was effective.)  Then you cried and declared you didn't
know what had come over you and that he couldn't ever respect you
again.  Then he had to dry your eyes and usually he proposed, to
show just how much he did respect you.  And then there were--  Oh,
there were so many things to do to bachelors and she knew them
all, the nuance of the sidelong glance, the half-smile behind the
fan, the swaying of the hips so that skirts swung like a bell, the
tears, the laughter, the flattery, the sweet sympathy.  Oh, all
the tricks that never failed to work--except with Ashley.

No, it didn't seem right to learn all these smart tricks, use them
so briefly and then put them away forever.  How wonderful it would
be never to marry but to go on being lovely in pale green dresses
and forever courted by handsome men.  But, if you went on too
long, you got to be an old maid like India Wilkes and everyone
said "poor thing" in that smug hateful way.  No, after all it was
better to marry and keep your self-respect even if you never had
any more fun.

Oh, what a mess life was!  Why had she been such an idiot as to
marry Charles of all people and have her life end at sixteen?

Her indignant and hopeless reverie was broken when the crowd began
pushing back against the walls, the ladies carefully holding their
hoops so that no careless contact should turn them up against
their bodies and show more pantalets than was proper.  Scarlett
tiptoed above the crowd and saw the captain of the militia
mounting the orchestra platform.  He shouted orders and half of
the Company fell into line.  For a few minutes they went through a
brisk drill that brought perspiration to their foreheads and
cheers and applause from the audience.  Scarlett clapped her hands
dutifully with the rest and, as the soldiers pushed forward toward
the punch and lemonade booths after they were dismissed, she
turned to Melanie, feeling that she had better begin her deception
about the Cause as soon as possible.

"They looked fine, didn't they?" she said.

Melanie was fussing about with the knitted things on the counter.

"Most of them would look a lot finer in gray uniforms and in
Virginia," she said, and she did not trouble to lower her voice.

Several of the proud mothers of members of the militia were
standing close by and overheard the remark.  Mrs. Guinan turned
scarlet and then white, for her twenty-five-year-old Willie was in
the company.

Scarlett was aghast at such words coming from Melly of all people.

"Why, Melly!"

"You know it's true, Scarlet.  I don't mean the little boys and
the old gentlemen.  But a lot of the militia are perfectly able to
tote a rifle and that's what they ought to be doing this minute."

"But--but--" began Scarlett, who had never considered the matter
before.  "Somebody's got to stay home to--"  What was it Willie
Guinan had told her by way of excusing his presence in Atlanta?
"Somebody's got to stay home to protect the state from invasion."

"Nobody's invading us and nobody's going to," said Melly coolly,
looking toward a group of the militia.  "And the best way to keep
out invaders is to go to Virginia and beat the Yankees there.  And
as for all this talk about the militia staying here to keep the
darkies from rising--why, it's the silliest thing I ever heard of.
Why should our people rise?  It's just a good excuse for cowards.
I'll bet we could lick the Yankees in a month if all the militia
of all the states went to Virginia.  So there!"

"Why, Melly!" cried Scarlett again, staring.

Melly's soft dark eyes were flashing angrily.  "My husband wasn't
afraid to go and neither was yours.  And I'd rather they'd both be
dead than here at home--  Oh, darling, I'm sorry.  How thoughtless
and cruel of me!"

She stroked Scarlett's arm appealingly and Scarlett stared at her.
But it was not of dead Charles she was thinking.  It was of
Ashley.  Suppose he too were to die?  She turned quickly and
smiled automatically as Dr. Meade walked up to their booth.

"Well, girls," he greeted them, "it was nice of you to come.  I
know what a sacrifice it must have been for you to come out
tonight.  But it's all for the Cause.  And I'm going to tell you a
secret.  I've a surprise way for making some more money tonight
for the hospital, but I'm afraid some of the ladies are going to
be shocked about it."

He stopped and chuckled as he tugged at his gray goatee.

"Oh, what?  Do tell!"

"On second thought I believe I'll keep you guessing, too.  But you
girls must stand up for me if the church members want to run me
out of town for doing it.  However, it's for the hospital.  You'll
see.  Nothing like this has ever been done before."

He went off pompously toward a group of chaperons in one corner,
and just as the two girls had turned to each other to discuss the
possibilities of the secret, two old gentlemen bore down on the
booth, declaring in loud voices that they wanted ten miles of
tatting.  Well, after all, old gentlemen were better than no
gentlemen at all, thought Scarlett, measuring out the tatting and
submitting demurely to being chucked under the chin.  The old
blades charged off toward the lemonade booth and others took their
places at the counter.  Their booth did not have so many customers
as did the other booths where the tootling laugh of Maybelle
Merriwether sounded and Fanny Elsing's giggles and the Whiting
girls' repartee made merriment.  Melly sold useless stuff to men
who could have no possible use for it as quietly and serenely as a
shopkeeper, and Scarlett patterned her conduct on Melly's.

There were crowds in front of every other counter but theirs,
girls chattering, men buying.  The few who came to them talked
about how they went to the university with Ashley and what a fine
soldier he was or spoke in respectful tones of Charles and how
great a loss to Atlanta his death had been.

Then the music broke into the rollicking strains of "Johnny
Booker, he'p dis Nigger!" and Scarlett thought she would scream.
She wanted to dance.  She wanted to dance.  She looked across the
floor and tapped her foot to the music and her green eyes blazed
so eagerly that they fairly snapped.  All the way across the
floor, a man, newly come and standing in the doorway, saw them,
started in recognition and watched closely the slanting eyes in
the sulky, rebellious face.  Then he grinned to himself as he
recognized the invitation that any male could read.

He was dressed in black broadcloth, a tall man, towering over the
officers who stood near him, bulky in the shoulders but tapering
to a small waist and absurdly small feet in varnished boots.  His
severe black suit, with fine ruffled shirt and trousers smartly
strapped beneath high insteps, was oddly at variance with his
physique and face, for he was foppishly groomed, the clothes of a
dandy on a body that was powerful and latently dangerous in its
lazy grace.  His hair was jet black, and his black mustache was
small and closely clipped, almost foreign looking compared with
the dashing, swooping mustaches of the cavalrymen near by.  He
looked, and was, a man of lusty and unashamed appetites.  He had
an air of utter assurance, of displeasing insolence about him, and
there was a twinkle of malice in his bold eyes as he stared at
Scarlett, until finally, feeling his gaze, she looked toward him.

Somewhere in her mind, the bell of recognition rang, but for the
moment she could not recall who he was.  But he was the first man
in months who had displayed an interest in her, and she threw him
a gay smile.  She made a little curtsy as he bowed, and then, as
he straightened and started toward her with a peculiarly lithe
Indian-like gait, her hand went to her mouth in horror, for she
knew who he was.

Thunderstruck, she stood as if paralyzed while he made his way
through the crowd.  Then she turned blindly, bent on flight into
the refreshment rooms, but her skirt caught on a nail of the
booth.  She jerked furiously at it, tearing it and, in an instant,
he was beside her.

"Permit me," he said bending over and disentangling the flounce.
"I hardly hoped that you would recall me, Miss O'Hara."

His voice was oddly pleasant to the ear, the well-modulated voice
of a gentleman, resonant and overlaid with the flat slow drawl of
the Charlestonian.

She looked up at him imploringly, her face crimson with the shame
of their last meeting, and met two of the blackest eyes she had
ever seen, dancing in merciless merriment.  Of all the people in
the world to turn up here, this terrible person who had witnessed
that scene with Ashley which still gave her nightmares; this
odious wretch who ruined girls and was not received by nice
people; this despicable man who had said, and with good cause,
that she was not a lady.

At the sound of his voice, Melanie turned and for the first time
in her life Scarlett thanked God for the existence of her sister-
in-law.

"Why--it's--it's Mr. Rhett Butler, isn't it?" said Melanie with a
little smile, putting out her hand.  "I met you--"

"On the happy occasion of the announcement of your betrothal," he
finished, bending over her hand.  "It is kind of you to recall
me."

"And what are you doing so far from Charleston, Mr. Butler?"

"A boring matter of business, Mrs. Wilkes.  I will be in and out
of your town from now on.  I find I must not only bring in goods
but see to the disposal of them."

"Bring in--" began Melly, her brow wrinkling, and then she broke
into a delighted smile.  "Why, you--you must be the famous Captain
Butler we've been hearing so much about--the blockade runner.
Why, every girl here is wearing dresses you brought in.  Scarlett,
aren't you thrilled--what's the matter, dear?  Are you faint?  Do
sit down."

Scarlett sank to the stool, her breath coming so rapidly she
feared the lacings of her stays would burst.  Oh, what a terrible
thing to happen!  She had never thought to meet this man again.
He picked up her black fan from the counter and began fanning her
solicitously, too solicitously, his face grave but his eyes still
dancing.

"It is quite warm in here," he said.  "No wonder Miss O'Hara is
faint.  May I lead you to a window?"

"No," said Scarlett, so rudely that Melly stared.

"She is not Miss O'Hara any longer," said Melly.  "She is Mrs.
Hamilton.  She is my sister now," and Melly bestowed one of her
fond little glances on her.  Scarlett felt that she would strangle
at the expression on Captain Butler's swarthy piratical face.

"I am sure that is a great gain to two charming ladies," said he,
making a slight bow.  That was the kind of remark all men made,
but when he said it it seemed to her that he meant just the
opposite.

"Your husbands are here tonight, I trust, on this happy occasion?
It would be a pleasure to renew acquaintances."

"My husband is in Virginia," said Melly with a proud lift of her
head.  "But Charles--"  Her voice broke.

"He died in camp," said Scarlett flatly.  She almost snapped the
words.  Would this creature never go away?  Melly looked at her,
startled, and the Captain made a gesture of self-reproach.

"My dear ladies--how could I!  You must forgive me.  But permit a
stranger to offer the comfort of saying that to die for one's
country is to live forever."

Melanie smiled at him through sparkling tears while Scarlett felt
the fox of wrath and impotent hate gnaw at her vitals.  Again he
had made a graceful remark, the kind of compliment any gentleman
would pay under such circumstances, but he did not mean a word of
it.  He was jeering at her.  He knew she hadn't loved Charles.
And Melly was just a big enough fool not to see through him.  Oh,
please God, don't let anybody else see through him, she thought
with a start of terror.  Would he tell what he knew?  Of course he
wasn't a gentleman and there was no telling what men would do when
they weren't gentlemen.  There was no standard to judge them by.
She looked up at him and saw that his mouth was pulled down at the
corners in mock sympathy, even while he swished the fan.
Something in his look challenged her spirit and brought her
strength back in a surge of dislike.  Abruptly she snatched the
fan from his hand.

"I'm quite all right," she said tartly.  "There's no need to blow
my hair out of place."

"Scarlett, darling!  Captain Butler, you must forgive her.  She--
she isn't herself when she hears poor Charlie's name spoken--and
perhaps, after all, we shouldn't have come here tonight.  We're
still in mourning, you see, and it's quite a strain on her--all
this gaiety and music, poor child."

"I quite understand," he said with elaborate gravity, but as he
turned and gave Melanie a searching look that went to the bottom
of her sweet worried eyes, his expression changed, reluctant
respect and gentleness coming over his dark face.  "I think you're
a courageous little lady, Mrs. Wilkes."

"Not a word about me!" thought Scarlett indignantly, as Melly
smiled in confusion and answered,

"Dear me, no, Captain Butler!  The hospital committee just had to
have us for this booth because at the last minute--  A pillow
case?  Here's a lovely one with a flag on it."

She turned to three cavalrymen who appeared at her counter.  For a
moment, Melanie thought how nice Captain Butler was.  Then she
wished that something more substantial than cheesecloth was
between her skirt and the spittoon that stood just outside the
booth, for the aim of the horsemen with amber streams of tobacco
juice was not so unerring as with their long horse pistols.  Then
she forgot about the Captain, Scarlett and the spittoons as more
customers crowded to her.

Scarlett sat quietly on the stool fanning herself, not daring to
look up, wishing Captain Butler back on the deck of his ship where
he belonged.

"Your husband has been dead long?"

"Oh, yes, a long time.  Almost a year."

"An aeon, I'm sure."

Scarlett was not sure what an aeon was, but there was no mistaking
the baiting quality of his voice, so she said nothing.

"Had you been married long?  Forgive my questions but I have been
away from this section for so long."

"Two months," said Scarlett, unwillingly.

"A tragedy, no less," his easy voice continued.

Oh, damn him, she thought violently.  If he was any other man in
the world I could simply freeze up and order him off.  But he
knows about Ashley and he knows I didn't love Charlie.  And my
hands are tied.  She said nothing, still looking down at her fan.

"And this is your first social appearance?"

"I know it looks quite odd," she explained rapidly.  "But the
McLure girls who were to take this booth were called away and
there was no one else, so Melanie and I--"

"No sacrifice is too great for the Cause."

Why, that was what Mrs. Elsing had said, but when she said it it
didn't sound the same way.  Hot words started to her lips but she
choked them back.  After all, she was here, not for the Cause, but
because she was tired of sitting home.

"I have always thought," he said reflectively, "that the system of
mourning, of immuring women in crepe for the rest of their lives
and forbidding them normal enjoyment is just as barbarous as the
Hindu suttee."

"Settee?"

He laughed and she blushed for her ignorance.  She hated people
who used words unknown to her.

"In India, when a man dies he is burned, instead of buried, and
his wife always climbs on the funeral pyre and is burned with
him."

"How dreadful!  Why do they do it?  Don't the police do anything
about it?"

"Of course not.  A wife who didn't burn herself would be a social
outcast.  All the worthy Hindu matrons would talk about her for
not behaving as a well-bred lady should--precisely as those worthy
matrons in the corner would talk about you, should you appear
tonight in a red dress and lead a reel.  Personally, I think
suttee much more merciful than our charming Southern custom of
burying widows alive!"

"How dare you say I'm buried alive!"

"How closely women crutch the very chains that bind them!  You
think the Hindu custom barbarous--but would you have had the
courage to appear here tonight if the Confederacy hadn't needed
you?"

Arguments of this character were always confusing to Scarlett.
His were doubly confusing because she had a vague idea there was
truth in them.  But now was the time to squelch him.

"Of course, I wouldn't have come.  It would have been--well,
disrespectful to--it would have seemed as if I hadn't lov--"

His eyes waited on her words, cynical amusement in them, and she
could not go on.  He knew she hadn't loved Charlie and he wouldn't
let her pretend to the nice polite sentiments that she should
express.  What a terrible, terrible thing it was to have to do
with a man who wasn't a gentleman.  A gentleman always appeared to
believe a lady even when he knew she was lying.  That was Southern
chivalry.  A gentleman always obeyed the rules and said the
correct things and made life easier for a lady.  But this man
seemed not to care for rules and evidently enjoyed talking of
things no one ever talked about.

"I am waiting breathlessly."

"I think you are horrid," she said, helplessly, dropping her eyes.

He leaned down across the counter until his mouth was near her ear
and hissed, in a very creditable imitation of the stage villains
who appeared infrequently at the Athenaeum Hall:  "Fear not, fair
lady!  Your guilty secret is safe with me!"

"Oh," she whispered, feverishly, "how can you say such things!"

"I only thought to ease your mind.  What would you have me say?
'Be mine, beautiful female, or I will reveal all?'"

She met his eyes unwillingly and saw they were as teasing as a
small boy's.  Suddenly she laughed.  It was such a silly
situation, after all.  He laughed too, and so loudly that several
of the chaperons in the corner looked their way.  Observing how
good a time Charles Hamilton's widow appeared to be having with a
perfect stranger, they put their heads together disapprovingly.



There was a roll of drums and many voices cried "Sh!" as Dr. Meade
mounted the platform and spread out his arms for quiet.

"We must all give grateful thanks to the charming ladies whose
indefatigable and patriotic efforts have made this bazaar not only
a pecuniary success," he began, "but have transformed this rough
hall into a bower of loveliness, a fit garden for the charming
rosebuds I see about me."

Everyone clapped approvingly.

"The ladies have given their best, not only of their time but of
the labor of their hands, and these beautiful objects in the
booths are doubly beautiful, made as they are by the fair hands of
our charming Southern women."

There were more shouts of approval, and Rhett Butler who had been
lounging negligently against the counter at Scarlett's side
whispered:  "Pompous goat, isn't he?"

Startled, at first horrified, at this lese majesty toward
Atlanta's most beloved citizen, she stared reprovingly at him.
But the doctor did look like a goat with his gray chin whiskers
wagging away at a great rate, and with difficulty she stifled a
giggle.

"But these things are not enough.  The good ladies of the hospital
committee, whose cool hands have soothed many a suffering brow and
brought back from the jaws of death our brave men wounded in the
bravest of all Causes, know our needs.  I will not enumerate them.
We must have more money to buy medical supplies from England, and
we have with us tonight the intrepid captain who has so
successfully run the blockade for a year and who will run it again
to bring us the drugs we need.  Captain Rhett Butler!"

Though caught unawares, the blockader made a graceful bow--too
graceful, thought Scarlett, trying to analyze it.  It was almost
as if he overdid his courtesy because his contempt for everybody
present was so great.  There was a loud burst of applause as he
bowed and a craning of necks from the ladies in the corner.  So
that was who poor Charles Hamilton's widow was carrying on with!
And Charlie hardly dead a year!

"We need more gold and I am asking you for it," the doctor
continued.  "I am asking a sacrifice but a sacrifice so small
compared with the sacrifices our gallant men in gray are making
that it will seem laughably small.  Ladies, I want your jewelry.
_I_ want your jewelry?  No, the Confederacy wants your jewelry,
the Confederacy calls for it and I know no one will hold back.
How fair a gem gleams on a lovely wrist!  How beautifully gold
brooches glitter on the bosoms of our patriotic women!  But how
much more beautiful is sacrifice than all the gold and gems of the
Ind.  The gold will be melted and the stones sold and the money
used to buy drugs and other medical supplies.  Ladies, there will
pass among you two of our gallant wounded, with baskets and--"
But the rest of his speech was lost in the storm and tumult of
clapping hands and cheering voices.

Scarlett's first thought was one of deep thankfulness that
mourning forbade her wearing her precious earbobs and the heavy
gold chain that had been Grandma Robillard's and the gold and
black enameled bracelets and the garnet brooch.  She saw the
little Zouave, a split-oak basket over his unwounded arm, making
the rounds of the crowd on her side of the hall and saw women, old
and young, laughing, eager, tugging at bracelets, squealing in
pretended pain as earrings came from pierced flesh, helping each
other undo stiff necklace clasps, unpinning brooches from bosoms.
There was a steady little clink-clink of metal on metal and cries
of "Wait--wait!  I've got it unfastened now.  There!"  Maybelle
Merriwether was pulling off her lovely twin bracelets from above
and below her elbows.  Fanny Elsing, crying "Mamma, may I?" was
tearing from her curls the seed-pearl ornament set in heavy gold
which had been in the family for generations.  As each offering
went into the basket, there was applause and cheering.

The grinning little man was coming to their booth now, his basket
heavy on his arm, and as he passed Rhett Butler a handsome gold
cigar case was thrown carelessly into the basket.  When he came to
Scarlett and rested his basket upon the counter, she shook her
head throwing wide her hands to show that she had nothing to give.
It was embarrassing to be the only person present who was giving
nothing.  And then she saw the bright gleam of her wide gold
wedding ring.

For a confused moment she tried to remember Charles' face--how he
had looked when he slipped it on her finger.  But the memory was
blurred, blurred by the sudden feeling of irritation that memory
of him always brought to her.  Charles--he was the reason why life
was over for her, why she was an old woman.

With a sudden wrench she seized the ring but it stuck.  The Zouave
was moving toward Melanie.

"Wait!" cried Scarlett.  "I have something for you!"  The ring
came off and, as she started to throw it into the basket, heaped
up with chains, watches, rings, pins and bracelets, she caught
Rhett Butler's eye.  His lips were twisted in a slight smile.
Defiantly, she tossed the ring onto the top of the pile.

"Oh, my darling!" whispered Molly, clutching her arm, her eyes
blazing with love and pride.  "You brave, brave girl!  Wait--
please, wait, Lieutenant Picard!  I have something for you, too!"

She was tugging at her own wedding ring, the ring Scarlett knew
had never once left that finger since Ashley put it there.
Scarlett knew, as no one did, how much it meant to her.  It came
off with difficulty and for a brief instant was clutched tightly
in the small palm.  Then it was laid gently on the pile of
jewelry.  The two girls stood looking after the Zouave who was
moving toward the group of elderly ladies in the corner, Scarlett
defiant, Melanie with a look more pitiful than tears.  And neither
expression was lost on the man who stood beside them.

"If you hadn't been brave enough to do it, I would never have been
either," said Melly, putting her arm about Scarlett's waist and
giving her a gentle squeeze.  For a moment Scarlett wanted to
shake her off and cry "Name of God!" at the top of her lungs, as
Gerald did when he was irritated, but she caught Rhett Butler's
eye and managed a very sour smile.  It was annoying the way Melly
always misconstrued her motives--but perhaps that was far
preferable to having her suspect the truth.

"What a beautiful gesture," said Rhett Butler, softly.  "It is
such sacrifices as yours that hearten our brave lads in gray."

Hot words bubbled to her lips and it was with difficulty that she
checked them.  There was mockery in everything he said.  She
disliked him heartily, lounging there against the booth.  But
there was something stimulating about him, something warm and
vital and electric.  All that was Irish in her rose to the
challenge of his black eyes.  She decided she was going to take
this man down a notch or two.  His knowledge of her secret gave
him an advantage over her that was exasperating, so she would have
to change that by putting him at a disadvantage somehow.  She
stifled her impulse to tell him exactly what she thought of him.
Sugar always caught more flies than vinegar, as Mammy often said,
and she was going to catch and subdue this fly, so he could never
again have her at his mercy.

"Thank you," she said sweetly, deliberately misunderstanding his
jibe.  "A compliment like that coming from so famous a man as
Captain Butler is appreciated."

He threw back his head and laughed freely--yelped, was what
Scarlett thought fiercely, her face becoming pink again.

"Why don't you say what you really think?" he demanded, lowering
his voice so that in the clatter and excitement of the collection,
it came only to her ears.  "Why don't you say I'm a damned rascal
and no gentleman and that I must take myself off or you'll have
one of these gallant boys in gray call me out?"

It was on the tip of her tongue to answer tartly, but she managed
by heroic control to say:  "Why, Captain Butler!  How you do run
on!  As if everybody didn't know how famous you are and how brave
and what a--what a--

"I am disappointed in you," he said.

"Disappointed?"

"Yes.  On the occasion of our first eventful meeting I thought to
myself that I had at last met a girl who was not only beautiful
but who had courage.  And now I see that you are only beautiful."

"Do you mean to call me a coward?"  She was ruffling like a hen.

"Exactly.  You lack the courage to say what you really think.
When I first met you, I thought:  There is a girl in a million.
She isn't like these other silly little fools who believe
everything their mammas tell them and act on it, no matter how
they feel.  And conceal all their feelings and desires and little
heartbreaks behind a lot of sweet words.  I thought:  Miss O'Hara
is a girl of rare spirit.  She knows what she wants and she
doesn't mind speaking her mind--or throwing vases."

"Oh," she said, rage breaking through.  "Then I'll speak my mind
right this minute.  If you'd had any raising at all you'd never
have come over here and talked to me.  You'd have known I never
wanted to lay eyes on you again!  But you aren't a gentleman!  You
are just a nasty ill-bred creature!  And you think that because
your rotten little boats can outrun the Yankees, you've the right
to come here and jeer at men who are brave and women who are
sacrificing everything for the Cause--"

"Stop, stop--" he begged with a grin.  "You started off very
nicely and said what you thought, but don't begin talking to me
about the Cause.  I'm tired of hearing about it and I'll bet you
are, too--"

"Why, how did--" she began, caught off her balance, and then
checked herself hastily, boiling with anger at herself for falling
into his trap.

"I stood there in the doorway before you saw me and I watched
you," he said.  "And I watched the other girls.  And they all
looked as though their faces came out of one mold.  Yours didn't.
You have an easy face to read.  You didn't have your mind on your
business and I'll wager you weren't thinking about our Cause or
the hospital.  It was all over your face that you wanted to dance
and have a good time and you couldn't.  So you were mad clean
through.  Tell the truth.  Am I not right?"

"I have nothing more to say to you, Captain Butler," she said as
formally as she could, trying to draw the rags of her dignity
about her.  "Just because you're conceited at being the 'great
blockader' doesn't give you the right to insult women."

"The great blockader!  That's a joke.  Pray give me only one
moment more of your precious time before you cast me into
darkness.  I wouldn't want so charming a little patriot to be left
under a misapprehension about my contribution to the Confederate
Cause."

"I don't care to listen to your brags."

"Blockading is a business with me and I'm making money out of it.
When I stop making money out of it, I'll quit.  What do you think
of that?"

"I think you're a mercenary rascal--just like the Yankees."

"Exactly," he grinned.  "And the Yankees help me make my money.
Why, last month I sailed my boat right into New York harbor and
took on a cargo."

"What!" cried Scarlett, interested and excited in spite of
herself.  "Didn't they shell you?"

"My poor innocent!  Of course not.  There are plenty of sturdy
Union patriots who are not averse to picking up money selling
goods to the Confederacy.  I run my boat into New York, buy from
Yankee firms, sub rosa, of course, and away I go.  And when that
gets a bit dangerous, I go to Nassau where these same Union
patriots have brought powder and shells and hoop skirts for me.
It's more convenient than going to England.  Sometimes it's a bit
difficult running it into Charleston or Wilmington--but you'd be
surprised how far a little gold goes."

"Oh, I knew Yankees were vile but I didn't know--"

"Why quibble about the Yankees earning an honest penny selling out
the Union?  It won't matter in a hundred years.  The result will
be the same.  They know the Confederacy will be licked eventually,
so why shouldn't they cash in on it?"

"Licked--us?"

"Of course."

"Will you please leave me--or will it be necessary for me to call
my carriage and go home to get rid of you?"

"A red-hot little Rebel," he said, with another sudden grin.  He
bowed and sauntered off, leaving her with her bosom heaving with
impotent rage and indignation.  There was disappointment burning
in her that she could not quite analyze, the disappointment of a
child seeing illusions crumble.  How dared he take the glamor from
the blockaders!  And how dared he say the Confederacy would be
licked!  He should be shot for that--shot like a traitor.  She
looked about the hall at the familiar faces, so assured of
success, so brave, so devoted, and somehow a cold little chill set
in at her heart.  Licked?  These people--why, of course not!  The
very idea was impossible, disloyal.

"What were you two whispering about?" asked Melanie, turning to
Scarlett as her customers drifted off.  "I couldn't help seeing
that Mrs. Merriwether had her eye on you all the time and, dear,
you know how she talks."

"Oh, the man's impossible--an ill-bred boor," said Scarlett.  "And
as for old lady Merriwether, let her talk.  I'm sick of acting
like a ninny, just for her benefit."

"Why, Scarlett!" cried Melanie, scandalized.

"Sh-sh," said Scarlett.  "Dr. Meade is going to make another
announcement."

The gathering quieted again as the doctor raised his voice, at
first in thanks to the ladies who had so willingly given their
jewelry.

"And now, ladies and gentlemen, I am going to propose a surprise--
an innovation that may shock some of you, but I ask you to
remember that all this is done for the hospital and for the
benefit of our boys lying there."

Everyone edged forward, in anticipation, trying to imagine what
the sedate doctor could propose that would be shocking.

"The dancing is about to begin and the first number will, of
course, be a reel, followed by a waltz.  The dances following, the
polkas, the schottisches, the mazurkas, will be preceded by short
reels.  I know the gentle rivalry to lead the reels very well and
so--"  The doctor mopped his brow and cast a quizzical glance at
the corner, where his wife sat among the chaperons.  "Gentlemen,
if you wish to lead a reel with the lady of your choice, you must
bargain for her.  I will be auctioneer and the proceeds will go to
the hospital."

Fans stopped in mid-swish and a ripple of excited murmuring ran
through the hall.  The chaperons' corner was in tumult and Mrs.
Meade, anxious to support her husband in an action of which she
heartily disapproved, was at a disadvantage.  Mrs. Elsing, Mrs.
Merriwether and Mrs. Whiting were red with indignation.  But
suddenly the Home Guard gave a cheer and it was taken up by the
other uniformed guests.  The young girls clapped their hands and
jumped excitedly.

"Don't you think it's--it's just--just a little like a slave
auction?" whispered Melanie, staring uncertainly at the embattled
doctor who heretofore had been perfect in her eyes.

Scarlett said nothing but her eyes glittered and her heart
contracted with a little pain.  If only she were not a widow.  If
only she were Scarlett O'Hara again, out there on the floor in an
apple-green dress with dark-green velvet ribbons dangling from her
bosom and tuberoses in her black hair--she'd lead that reel.  Yes,
indeed!  There'd be a dozen men battling for her and paying over
money to the doctor.  Oh, to have to sit here, a wallflower
against her will and see Fanny or Maybelle lead the first reel as
the belle of Atlanta!

Above the tumult sounded the voice of the little Zouave, his
Creole accent very obvious:  "Eef I may--twenty dollars for Mees
Maybelle Merriwether."

Maybelle collapsed with blushes against Fanny's shoulder and the
two girls hid their faces in each other's necks and giggled, as
other voices began calling other names, other amounts of money.
Dr. Meade had begun to smile again, ignoring completely the
indignant whispers that came from the Ladies' Hospital Committee
in the corner.

At first, Mrs. Merriwether had stated flatly and loudly that her
Maybelle would never take part in such a proceeding; but as
Maybelle's name was called most often and the amount went up to
seventy-five dollars, her protests began to dwindle.  Scarlett
leaned her elbows on the counter and almost glared at the excited
laughing crowd surging about the platform, their hands full of
Confederate paper money.

Now, they would all dance--except her and the old ladies.  Now
everyone would have a good time, except her.  She saw Rhett Butler
standing just below the doctor and, before she could change the
expression of her face, he saw her and one corner of his mouth
went down and one eyebrow went up.  She jerked her chin up and
turned away from him and suddenly she heard her own name called--
called in an unmistakable Charleston voice that rang out above the
hubbub of other names.

"Mrs. Charles Hamilton--one hundred and fifty dollars--in gold."

A sudden hush fell on the crowd both at the mention of the sum and
at the name.  Scarlett was so startled she could not even move.
She remained sitting with her chin in her hands, her eyes wide
with astonishment.  Everybody turned to look at her.  She saw the
doctor lean down from the platform and whisper something to Rhett
Butler.  Probably telling him she was in mourning and it was
impossible for her to appear on the floor.  She saw Rhett's
shoulders shrug lazily.

"Another one of our belles, perhaps?" questioned the doctor.

"No," said Rhett clearly, his eyes sweeping the crowd carelessly.
"Mrs. Hamilton."

"I tell you it is impossible," said the doctor testily.  "Mrs.
Hamilton will not--"

Scarlett heard a voice which, at first, she did not recognize as
her own.

"Yes, I will!"

She leaped to her feet, her heart hammering so wildly she feared
she could not stand, hammering with the thrill of being the center
of attention again, of being the most highly desired girl present
and oh, best of all, at the prospect of dancing again.

"Oh, I don't care!  I don't care what they say!" she whispered, as
a sweet madness swept over her.  She tossed her head and sped out
of the booth, tapping her heels like castanets, snapping open her
black silk fan to its widest.

For a fleeting instant she saw Melanie's incredulous face, the
look on the chaperons' faces, the petulant girls, the enthusiastic
approval of the soldiers.

Then she was on the floor and Rhett Butler was advancing toward
her through the aisle of the crowd, that nasty mocking smile on
his face.  But she didn't care--didn't care if he were Abe Lincoln
himself!  She was going to dance again.  She was going to lead the
reel.  She swept him a low curtsy and a dazzling smile and he
bowed, one hand on his frilled bosom.  Levi, horrified, was quick
to cover the situation and bawled:  "Choose yo' padners fo' de
Ferginny reel!"

And the orchestra crashed into that best of all reel tunes,
"Dixie."



"How dare you make me so conspicuous, Captain Butler?"

"But, my dear Mrs. Hamilton, you so obviously wanted to be
conspicuous!"

"How could you call my name out in front of everybody?"

"You could have refused."

"But--I owe it to the Cause--I--I couldn't think of myself when
you were offering so much in gold.  Stop laughing, everyone is
looking at us."

"They will look at us anyway.  Don't try to palm off that twaddle
about the Cause to me.  You wanted to dance and I gave you the
opportunity.  This march is the last figure of the reel, isn't
it?"

"Yes--really, I must stop and sit down now."

"Why?  Have I stepped on your feet?"

"No--but they'll talk about me."

"Do you really care--down in your heart?"

"Well--"

"You aren't committing any crime, are you?  Why not dance the
waltz with me?"

"But if Mother ever--"

"Still tied to mamma's apronstrings."

"Oh, you have the nastiest way of making virtues sound so stupid."

"But virtues are stupid.  Do you care if people talk?"

"No--but--well, let's don't talk about it.  Thank goodness the
waltz is beginning.  Reels always leave me breathless."

"Don't dodge my questions.  Has what other women said ever
mattered to you?"

"Oh, if you're going to pin me down--no!  But a girl is supposed
to mind.  Tonight, though, I don't care."

"Bravo!  Now you are beginning to think for yourself instead of
letting others think for you.  That's the beginning of wisdom."

"Oh, but--"

"When you've been talked about as much as I have, you'll realize
how little it matters.  Just think, there's not a home in
Charleston where I am received.  Not even my contribution to our
just and holy Cause lifts the ban."

"How dreadful!"

"Oh, not at all.  Until you've lost your reputation, you never
realize what a burden it was or what freedom really is."

"You do talk scandalous!"

"Scandalously and truly.  Always providing you have enough
courage--or money--you can do without a reputation."

"Money can't buy everything."

"Someone must have told you that.  You'd never think of such a
platitude all by yourself.  What can't it buy?"

"Oh, well, I don't know--not happiness or love, anyway."

"Generally it can.  And when it can't, it can buy some of the most
remarkable substitutes."

"And have you so much money, Captain Butler?"

"What an ill-bred question, Mrs. Hamilton.  I'm surprised.  But,
yes.  For a young man cut off without a shilling in early youth,
I've done very well.  And I'm sure I'll clean up a million on the
blockade."

"Oh, no!"

"Oh, yes!  What most people don't seem to realize is that there
is just as much money to be made out of the wreckage of a
civilization as from the upbuilding of one."

"And what does all that mean?"

"Your family and my family and everyone here tonight made their
money out of changing a wilderness into a civilization.  That's
empire building.  There's good money in empire building.  But,
there's more in empire wrecking."

"What empire are you talking about?"

"This empire we're living in--the South--the Confederacy--the
Cotton Kingdom--it's breaking up right under our feet.  Only most
fools won't see it and take advantage of the situation created by
the collapse.  I'm making my fortune out of the wreckage."

"Then you really think we're going to get licked?"

"Yes.  Why be an ostrich?"

"Oh, dear, it bores me to talk about such like.  Don't you ever
say pretty things, Captain Butler?"

"Would it please you if I said your eyes were twin goldfish bowls
filled to the brim with the clearest green water and that when the
fish swim to the top, as they are doing now, you are devilishly
charming?"

"Oh, I don't like that. . . .  Isn't the music gorgeous?  Oh, I
could waltz forever!  I didn't know I had missed it so!"

"You are the most beautiful dancer I've ever held in my arms."

"Captain Butler, you must not hold me so tightly.  Everybody is
looking."

"If no one were looking, would you care?"

"Captain Butler, you forget yourself."

"Not for a minute.  How could I, with you in my arms? . . .  What
is that tune?  Isn't it new?"

"Yes.  Isn't it divine?  It's something we captured from the
Yankees."

"What's the name of it?"

"'When This Cruel War Is Over.'"

"What are the words?  Sing them to me."


"Dearest one, do you remember
  When we last did meet?
When you told me how you loved me,
  Kneeling at my feet?
Oh, how proud you stood before me
  In your suit of gray,
When you vowed from me and country
  Ne'er to go astray.
Weeping sad and lonely,
  Sighs and tears how vain!
When this cruel war is over
  Pray that we meet again!"


"Of course, it was 'suit of blue' but we changed it to 'gray.' . . .
Oh, you waltz so well, Captain Butler.  Most big men don't, you
know.  And to think it will be years and years before I'll dance
again."

"It will only be a few minutes.  I'm going to bid you in for the
next reel--and the next and the next."

"Oh, no, I couldn't!  You mustn't!  My reputation will be ruined."

"It's in shreds already, so what does another dance matter?  Maybe
I'll give the other boys a chance after I've had five or six, but
I must have the last one."

"Oh, all right.  I know I'm crazy but I don't care.  I don't care
a bit what anybody says.  I'm so tired of sitting at home.  I'm
going to dance and dance--"

"And not wear black?  I loathe funeral crepe."

"Oh, I couldn't take off mourning--Captain Butler, you must not
hold me so tightly.  I'll be mad at you if you do."

"And you look gorgeous when you are mad.  I'll squeeze you again--
there--just to see if you will really get mad.  You have no idea
how charming you were that day at Twelve Oaks when you were mad
and throwing things."

"Oh, please--won't you forget that?"

"No, it is one of my most priceless memories--a delicately
nurtured Southern belle with her Irish up--  You are very Irish,
you know."

"Oh, dear, there's the end of the music and there's Aunt Pittypat
coming out of the back room.  I know Mrs. Merriwether must have
told her.  Oh, for goodness' sakes, let's walk over and look out
the window.  I don't want her to catch me now.  Her eyes are as
big as saucers."



CHAPTER X


Over the waffles next morning, Pittypat was lachrymose, Melanie
was silent and Scarlett defiant.

"I don't care if they do talk.  I'll bet I made more money for the
hospital than any girl there--more than all the messy old stuff we
sold, too."

"Oh, dear, what does the money matter?" wailed Pittypat, wringing
her hands.  "I just couldn't believe my eyes, and poor Charlie
hardly dead a year. . . .  And that awful Captain Butler, making
you so conspicuous, and he's a terrible, terrible person,
Scarlett.  Mrs. Whiting's cousin, Mrs. Coleman, whose husband came
from Charleston, told me about him.  He's the black sheep of a
lovely family--oh, how could any of the Butlers ever turn out
anything like him?  He isn't received in Charleston and he has the
fastest reputation and there was something about a girl--something
so bad Mrs. Coleman didn't even know what it was--"

"Oh, I can't believe he's that bad," said Melly gently.  "He
seemed a perfect gentleman and when you think how brave he's been,
running the blockade--"

"He isn't brave," said Scarlett perversely, pouring half a pitcher
of syrup over her waffles.  "He just does it for money.  He told
me so.  He doesn't care anything about the Confederacy and he says
we're going to get licked.  But he dances divinely."

Her audience was speechless with horror.

"I'm tired of sitting at home and I'm not going to do it any
longer.  If they all talked about me about last night, then my
reputation is already gone and it won't matter what else they
say."

It did not occur to her that the idea was Rhett Butler's.  It came
so patly and fitted so well with what she was thinking.

"Oh!  What will your mother say when she hears?  What will she
think of me?"

A cold qualm of guilt assailed Scarlett at the thought of Ellen's
consternation, should she ever learn of her daughter's scandalous
conduct.  But she took heart at the thought of the twenty-five
miles between Atlanta and Tara.  Miss Pitty certainly wouldn't
tell Ellen.  It would put her in such a bad light as a chaperon.
And if Pitty didn't tattle, she was safe.

"I think--" said Pitty, "yes, I think I'd better write Henry a
letter about it--much as I hate it--but he's our only male
relative, and make him go speak reprovingly to Captain Butler--
Oh, dear, if Charlie were only alive--  You must never, never
speak to that man again, Scarlett."

Melanie had been sitting quietly, her hands in her lap, her
waffles cooling on her plate.  She arose and, coming behind
Scarlett, put her arms about her neck.

"Darling," she said, "don't you get upset.  I understand and it
was a brave thing you did last night and it's going to help the
hospital a lot.  And if anybody dares say one little word about
you, I'll tend to them. . . .  Aunt Pitty, don't cry.  It has been
hard on Scarlett, not going anywhere.  She's just a baby."  Her
fingers played in Scarlett's black hair.  "And maybe we'd all be
better off if we went out occasionally to parties.  Maybe we've
been very selfish, staying here with our grief.  War times aren't
like other times.  When I think of all the soldiers in town who
are far from home and haven't any friends to call on at night--and
the ones in the hospital who are well enough to be out of bed and
not well enough to go back in the army--  Why, we have been
selfish.  We ought to have three convalescents in our house this
minute, like everybody else, and some of the soldiers out to
dinner every Sunday.  There, Scarlett, don't you fret.  People
won't talk when they understand.  We know you loved Charlie."

Scarlett was far from fretting and Melanie's soft hands in her
hair were irritating.  She wanted to jerk her head away and say
"Oh, fiddle-dee-dee!" for the warming memory was still on her of
how the Home Guard and the militia and the soldiers from the
hospital had fought for her dances last night.  Of all the people
in the world, she didn't want Melly for a defender.  She could
defend herself, thank you, and if the old cats wanted to squall--
well, she could get along without the old cats.  There were too
many nice officers in the world for her to bother about what old
women said.

Pittypat was dabbing at her eyes under Melanie's soothing words
when Prissy entered with a bulky letter.

"Fer you.  Miss Melly.  A lil nigger boy brung it."

"For me?" said Melly, wondering, as she ripped open the envelope.

Scarlett was making headway with her waffles and so noticed
nothing until she heard a burst of tears from Melly and, looking
up, saw Aunt Pittypat's hand go to her heart.

"Ashley's dead!" screamed Pittypat, throwing her head back and
letting her arms go limp.

"Oh, my God!" cried Scarlett, her blood turning to ice water.

"No!  No!" cried Melanie.  "Quick!  Her smelling salts, Scarlett!
There, there, honey, do you feel better?  Breathe deep.  No, it's
not Ashley.  I'm so sorry I scared you.  I was crying because I'm
so happy," and suddenly she opened her clenched palm and pressed
some object that was in it to her lips.  "I'm so happy," and burst
into tears again.

Scarlett caught a fleeting glimpse and saw that it was a broad
gold ring.

"Read it," said Melly, pointing to the letter on the floor.  "Oh,
how sweet, how kind, he is!"

Scarlett, bewildered, picked up the single sheet and saw written
in a black, bold hand:  "The Confederacy may need the lifeblood of
its men but not yet does it demand the heart's blood of its women.
Accept, dear Madam, this token of my reverence for your courage
and do not think that your sacrifice has been in vain, for this
ring has been redeemed at ten times its value.  Captain Rhett
Butler."

Melanie slipped the ring on her finger and looked at it lovingly.

"I told you he was a gentleman, didn't I?" she said turning to
Pittypat, her smile bright through the teardrops on her face.  "No
one but a gentleman of refinement and thoughtfulness would ever
have thought how it broke my heart to--  I'll send my gold chain
instead.  Aunt Pittypat, you must write him a note and invite him
to Sunday dinner so I can thank him."

In the excitement, neither of the others seemed to have thought
that Captain Butler had not returned Scarlett's ring, too.  But
she thought of it, annoyed.  And she knew it had not been Captain
Butler's refinement that had prompted so gallant a gesture.  It
was that he intended to be asked into Pittypat's house and knew
unerringly how to get the invitation.



"I was greatly disturbed to hear of your recent conduct," ran
Ellen's letter and Scarlett, who was reading it at the table,
scowled.  Bad news certainly traveled swiftly.  She had often
heard in Charleston and Savannah that Atlanta people gossiped more
and meddled in other people's business more than any other people
in the South, and now she believed it.  The bazaar had taken place
Monday night and today was only Thursday.  Which of the old cats
had taken it upon herself to write Ellen?  For a moment she
suspected Pittypat but immediately abandoned that thought.  Poor
Pittypat had been quaking in her number-three shoes for fear of
being blamed for Scarlett's forward conduct and would be the last
to notify Ellen of her own inadequate chaperonage.  Probably it
was Mrs. Merriwether.

"It is difficult for me to believe that you could so forget
yourself and your rearing.  I will pass over the impropriety of
your appearing publicly while in mourning, realizing your warm
desire to be of assistance to the hospital.  But to dance, and
with such a man as Captain Butler!  I have heard much of him (as
who has not?) and Pauline wrote me only last week that he is a man
of bad repute and not even received by his own family in
Charleston, except of course by his heartbroken mother.  He is a
thoroughly bad character who would take advantage of your youth
and innocence to make you conspicuous and publicly disgrace you
and your family.  How could Miss Pittypat have so neglected her
duty to you?"

Scarlett looked across the table at her aunt.  The old lady had
recognized Ellen's handwriting and her fat little mouth was pursed
in a frightened way, like a baby who fears a scolding and hopes to
ward it off by tears.

"I am heartbroken to think that you could so soon forget your
rearing.  I have thought of calling you home immediately but will
leave that to your father's discretion.  He will be in Atlanta
Friday to speak with Captain Butler and to escort you home.  I
fear he will be severe with you despite my pleadings.  I hope and
pray it was only youth and thoughtlessness that prompted such
forward conduct.  No one can wish to serve our Cause more than I,
and I wish my daughters to feel the same way, but to disgrace--"

There was more in the same vein but Scarlett did not finish it.
For once, she was thoroughly frightened.  She did not feel
reckless and defiant now.  She felt as young and guilty as when
she was ten and had thrown a buttered biscuit at Suellen at the
table.  To think of her gentle mother reproving her so harshly and
her father coming to town to talk to Captain Butler.  The real
seriousness of the matter grew on her.  Gerald was going to be
severe.  This was one time when she knew she couldn't wiggle out
of her punishment by sitting on his knee and being sweet and pert.

"Not--not bad news?" quavered Pittypat.

"Pa is coming tomorrow and he's going to land on me like a duck on
a June bug," answered Scarlett dolorously.

"Prissy, find my salts," fluttered Pittypat, pushing back her
chair from her half-eaten meal.  "I--I feel faint."

"Dey's in yo' skirt pocket," said Prissy, who had been hovering
behind Scarlett, enjoying the sensational drama.  Mist' Gerald in
a temper was always exciting, providing his temper was not
directed at her kinky head.  Pitty fumbled at her skirt and held
the vial to her nose.

"You all must stand by me and not leave me alone with him for one
minute," cried Scarlett.  "He's so fond of you both, and if you
are with me he can't fuss at me."

"I couldn't," said Pittypat weakly, rising to her feet.  "I--I
feel ill.  I must go lie down.  I shall lie down all day tomorrow.
You must give him my excuses."

"Coward!" thought Scarlett, glowering at her.

Melly rallied to the defense, though white and frightened at the
prospect of facing the fire-eating Mr. O'Hara.  "I'll--I'll help
you explain how you did it for the hospital.  Surely he'll
understand."

"No, he won't," said Scarlett.  "And oh, I shall die if I have to
go back to Tara in disgrace, like Mother threatens!"

"Oh, you can't go home," cried Pittypat, bursting into tears.  "If
you did I should be forced--yes, forced to ask Henry to come live
with us, and you know I just couldn't live with Henry.  I'm so
nervous with just Melly in the house at night, with so many
strange men in town.  You're so brave I don't mind being here
without a man!"

"Oh, he couldn't take you to Tara!" said Melly, looking as if she
too would cry in a moment.  "This is your home now.  What would we
ever do without you?"

"You'd be glad to do without me if you knew what I really think of
you," thought Scarlett sourly, wishing there were some other
person than Melanie to help ward off Gerald's wrath.  It was
sickening to be defended by someone you disliked so much.

"Perhaps we should recall our invitation to Captain Butler--"
began Pittypat.

"Oh, we couldn't!  It would be the height of rudeness!" cried
Melly, distressed.

"Help me to bed.  I'm going to be ill," moaned Pittypat.  "Oh,
Scarlett, how could you have brought this on me?"

Pittypat was ill and in her bed when Gerald arrived the next
afternoon.  She sent many messages of regret to him from behind
her closed door and left the two frightened girls to preside over
the supper table.  Gerald was ominously silent although he kissed
Scarlett and pinched Melanie's cheek approvingly and called her
"Cousin Melly."  Scarlett would have infinitely preferred
bellowing oaths and accusations.  True to her promise, Melanie
clung to Scarlett's skirts like a small rustling shadow and Gerald
was too much of a gentleman to upbraid his daughter in front of
her.  Scarlett had to admit that Melanie carried off things very
well, acting as if she knew nothing was amiss, and she actually
succeeded in engaging Gerald in conversation, once the supper had
been served.

"I want to know all about the County," she said, beaming upon him.
"India and Honey are such poor correspondents, and I know you know
everything that goes on down there.  Do tell us about Joe
Fontaine's wedding."

Gerald warmed to the flattery and said that the wedding had been a
quiet affair, "not like you girls had," for Joe had only a few
days' furlough.  Sally, the little Munroe chit, looked very
pretty.  No, he couldn't recall what she wore but he did hear that
she didn't have a "second-day" dress.

"She didn't!" exclaimed the girls, scandalized.

"Sure, because she didn't have a second day," Gerald explained and
bawled with laughter before recalling that perhaps such remarks
were not fit for female ears.  Scarlett's spirits soared at his
laugh and she blessed Melanie's tact.

"Back Joe went to Virginia the next day," Gerald added hastily.
"There was no visiting about and dancing afterwards.  The Tarleton
twins are home."

"We heard that.  Have they recovered?"

"They weren't badly wounded.  Stuart had it in the knee and a
minie ball went through Brent's shoulder.  You had it, too, that
they were mentioned in dispatches for bravery?"

"No!  Tell us!"

"Hare brained--both of them.  I'm believing there's Irish in
them," said Gerald complacently.  "I forget what they did, but
Brent is a lieutenant now."

Scarlett felt pleased at hearing of their exploits, pleased in a
proprietary manner.  Once a man had been her beau, she never lost
the conviction that he belonged to her, and all his good deeds
redounded to her credit.

"And I've news that'll be holding the both of you," said Gerald.
"They're saying Stu is courting at Twelve Oaks again."

"Honey or India?" questioned Melly excitedly, while Scarlett
stared almost indignantly.

"Oh, Miss India, to be sure.  Didn't she have him fast till this
baggage of mine winked at him?"

"Oh," said Melly, somewhat embarrassed at Gerald's outspokenness.

"And more than that, young Brent has taken to hanging about Tara.
Now!"

Scarlett could not speak.  The defection of her beaux was almost
insulting.  Especially when she recalled how wildly both the twins
had acted when she told them she was going to marry Charles.
Stuart had even threatened to shoot Charles, or Scarlett, or
himself, or all three.  It had been most exciting.

"Suellen?" questioned Melly, breaking into a pleased smile.  "But
I thought Mr. Kennedy--"

"Oh, him?" said Gerald.  "Frank Kennedy still pussyfoots about,
afraid of his shadow, and I'll be asking him his intentions soon
if he doesn't speak up.  No, 'tis me baby."

"Carreen?"

"She's nothing but a child!" said Scarlett sharply, finding her
tongue.

"She's little more than a year younger than you were, Miss, when
you were married," retorted Gerald.  "Is it you're grudging your
old beau to your sister?"

Melly blushed, unaccustomed to such frankness, and signaled Peter
to bring in the sweet potato pie.  Frantically she cast about in
her mind for some other topic of conversation which would not be
so personal but which would divert Mr. O'Hara from the purpose of
his trip.  She could think of nothing but, once started, Gerald
needed no stimulus other than an audience.  He talked on about the
thievery of the commissary department which every month increased
its demands, the knavish stupidity of Jefferson Davis and the
blackguardery of the Irish who were being enticed into the Yankee
army by bounty money.

When the wine was on the table and the two girls rose to leave
him, Gerald cocked a severe eye at his daughter from under
frowning brows and commanded her presence alone for a few minutes.
Scarlett cast a despairing glance at Melly, who twisted her
handkerchief helplessly and went out, softly pulling the sliding
doors together.

"How now, Missy!" bawled Gerald, pouring himself a glass of port.
"'Tis a fine way to act!  Is it another husband you're trying to
catch and you so fresh a widow?"

"Not so loud, Pa, the servants--"

"They know already, to be sure, and everybody knows of our
disgrace.  And your poor mother taking to her bed with it and me
not able to hold up me head.  'Tis shameful.  No, Puss, you need
not think to get around me with tears this time," he said hastily
and with some panic in his voice as Scarlett's lids began to bat
and her mouth to screw up.  "I know you.  You'd be flirting at the
wake of your husband.  Don't cry.  There, I'll be saying no more
tonight, for I'm going to see this fine Captain Butler who makes
so light of me daughter's reputation.  But in the morning--  There
now, don't cry.  Twill do you no good at all, at all.  'Tis firm
that I am and back to Tara you'll be going tomorrow before you're
disgracing the lot of us again.  Don't cry, pet.  Look what I've
brought you!  Isn't that a pretty present?  See, look!  How could
you be putting so much trouble on me, bringing me all the way up
here when 'tis a busy man I am?  Don't cry!"



Melanie and Pittypat had gone to sleep hours before, but Scarlett
lay awake in the warm darkness, her heart heavy and frightened in
her breast.  To leave Atlanta when life had just begun again and
go home and face Ellen!  She would rather die than face her
mother.  She wished she were dead, this very minute, then everyone
would be sorry they had been so hateful.  She turned and tossed on
the hot pillow until a noise far up the quiet street reached her
ears.  It was an oddly familiar noise, blurred and indistinct
though it was.  She slipped out of bed and went to the window.
The street with its over-arching trees was softly, deeply black
under a dim star-studded sky.  The noise came closer, the sound of
wheels, the plod of a horse's hooves and voices.  And suddenly she
grinned for, as a voice thick with brogue and whisky came to her,
raised in "Peg in a Low-backed Car," she knew.  This might not be
Jonesboro on Court Day, but Gerald was coming home in the same
condition.

She saw the dark bulk of a buggy stop in front of the house and
indistinct figures alight.  Someone was with him.  Two figures
paused at the gate and she heard the click of the latch and
Gerald's voice came plain,

"Now I'll be giving you the 'Lament for Robert Emmet.'  'Tis a
song you should be knowing, me lad.  I'll teach it to you."

"I'd like to learn it," replied his companion, a hint of buried
laughter in his flat drawling voice.  "But not now, Mr. O'Hara."

"Oh, my God, it's that hateful Butler man!" thought Scarlett, at
first annoyed.  Then she took heart.  At least they hadn't shot
each other.  And they must be on amicable terms to be coming home
together at this hour and in this condition.

"Sing it I will and listen you will or I'll be shooting you for
the Orangeman you are."

"Not Orangeman--Charlestonian."

"'Tis no better.  'Tis worse.  I have two sister-in-laws in
Charleston and I know."

"Is he going to tell the whole neighborhood?" thought Scarlett
panic-stricken, reaching for her wrapper.  But what could she do?
She couldn't go downstairs at this hour of the night and drag her
father in from the street.

With no further warning, Gerald, who was hanging on the gate,
threw back his head and began the "Lament," in a roaring bass.
Scarlett rested her elbows on the window sill and listened,
grinning unwillingly.  It would be a beautiful song, if only her
father could carry a tune.  It was one of her favorite songs and,
for a moment, she followed the fine melancholy of those verses
beginning:


"She is far from the land where her young hero sleeps
And lovers are round her sighing."


The song went on and she heard stirrings in Pittypat's and Melly's
rooms.  Poor things, they'd certainly be upset.  They were not
used to full-blooded males like Gerald.  When the song had
finished, two forms merged into one, came up the walk and mounted
the steps.  A discreet knock sounded at the door.

"I suppose I must go down," thought Scarlett.  "After all he's my
father and poor Pitty would die before she'd go."  Besides, she
didn't want the servants to see Gerald in his present condition.
And if Peter tried to put him to bed, he might get unruly.  Pork
was the only one who knew how to handle him.

She pinned the wrapper close about her throat, lit her bedside
candle and hurried down the dark stairs into the front hall.
Setting the candle on the stand, she unlocked the door and in the
wavering light she saw Rhett Butler, not a ruffle disarranged,
supporting her small, thickset father.  The "Lament" had evidently
been Gerald's swan song for he was frankly hanging onto his
companion's arm.  His hat was gone, his crisp long hair was
tumbled in a white mane, his cravat was under one ear, and there
were liquor stains down his shirt bosom.

"Your father, I believe?" said Captain Butler, his eyes amused in
his swarthy face.  He took in her dishabille in one glance that
seemed to penetrate through her wrapper.

"Bring him in," she said shortly, embarrassed at her attire,
infuriated at Gerald for putting her in a position where this man
could laugh at her.

Rhett propelled Gerald forward.  "Shall I help you take him
upstairs?  You cannot manage him.  He's quite heavy."

Her mouth fell open with horror at the audacity of his proposal.
Just imagine what Pittypat and Melly cowering in their beds would
think, should Captain Butler come upstairs!

"Mother of God, no!  In here, in the parlor on that settee."

"The suttee, did you say?"

"I'll thank you to keep a civil tongue in your head.  Here.  Now
lay him down."

"Shall I take off his boots?"

"No.  He's slept in them before."

She could have bitten off her tongue for that slip, for he laughed
softly as he crossed Gerald's legs.

"Please go, now."

He walked out into the dim hall and picked up the hat he had
dropped on the doorsill.

"I will be seeing you Sunday at dinner," he said and went out,
closing the door noiselessly behind him.

Scarlett arose at five-thirty, before the servants had come in
from the back yard to start breakfast, and slipped down the steps
to the quiet lower floor.  Gerald was awake, sitting on the sofa,
his hands gripping his bullet head as if he wished to crush it
between his palms.  He looked up furtively as she entered.  The
pain of moving his eyes was too excruciating to be borne and he
groaned.

"Wurra the day!"

"It's a fine way you've acted, Pa," she began in a furious
whisper.  "Coming home at such an hour and waking all the
neighbors with your singing."

"I sang?"

"Sang!  You woke the echoes singing the 'Lament.'"

"'Tis nothing I'm remembering."

"The neighbors will remember it till their dying day and so will
Miss Pittypat and Melanie."

"Mother of Sorrows," moaned Gerald, moving a thickly furred tongue
around parched lips.  "'Tis little I'm remembering after the game
started."

"Game?"

"That laddybuck Butler bragged that he was the best poker player
in--"

"How much did you lose?"

"Why, I won, naturally.  A drink or two helps me game."

"Look in your wallet."

As if every movement was agony, Gerald removed his wallet from his
coat and opened it.  It was empty and he looked at it in forlorn
bewilderment.

"Five hundred dollars," he said.  "And 'twas to buy things from
the blockaders for Mrs. O'Hara, and now not even fare left to
Tara."

As she looked indignantly at the empty purse, an idea took form in
Scarlett's mind and grew swiftly.

"I'll not be holding up my head in this town," she began.  "You've
disgraced us all."

"Hold your tongue, Puss.  Can you not see me head is bursting?"

"Coming home drunk with a man like Captain Butler, and singing at
the top of your lungs for everyone to hear and losing all that
money."

"The man is too clever with cards to be a gentleman.  He--"

"What will Mother say when she hears?"

He looked up in sudden anguished apprehension.  "You wouldn't be
telling your mother a word and upsetting her, now would you?"

Scarlett said nothing but pursed her lips.

"Think now how 'twould hurt her and her so gentle."

"And to think, Pa, that you said only last night I had disgraced
the family!  Me, with my poor little dance to make money for the
soldiers.  Oh, I could cry."

"Well, don't," pleaded Gerald.  "'Twould be more than me poor head
could stand and sure 'tis bursting now."

"And you said that I--"

"Now Puss, now Puss, don't you be hurt at what your poor old
father said and him not meaning a thing and not understanding a
thing!  Sure, you're a fine well-meaning girl, I'm sure."

"And wanting to take me home in disgrace."

"Ah, darling, I wouldn't be doing that.  'Twas to tease you.  You
won't be mentioning the money to your mother and her in a flutter
about expenses already?"

"No," said Scarlett frankly, "I won't, if you'll let me stay here
and if you'll tell Mother that 'twas nothing but a lot of gossip
from old cats."

Gerald looked mournfully at his daughter.

"'Tis blackmail, no less."

"And last night was a scandal, no less."

"Well," he began wheedlingly, "we'll be forgetting all that.  And
do you think a fine pretty lady like Miss Pittypat would be having
any brandy in the house?  The hair of the dog--"

Scarlett turned and tiptoed through the silent hall into the
dining room to get the brandy bottle that she and Melly privately
called the "swoon bottle" because Pittypat always took a sip from
it when her fluttering heart made her faint--or seem to faint.
Triumph was written on her face and no trace of shame for her
unfilial treatment of Gerald.  Now Ellen would be soothed with
lies if any other busybody wrote her.  Now she could stay in
Atlanta.  Now she could do almost as she pleased, Pittypat being
the weak vessel that she was.  She unlocked the cellaret and stood
for a moment with the bottle and glass pressed to her bosom.

She saw a long vista of picnics by the bubbling waters of
Peachtree Creek and barbecues at Stone Mountain, receptions and
balls, afternoon danceables, buggy rides and Sunday-night buffet
suppers.  She would be there, right in the heart of things, right
in the center of a crowd of men.  And men fell in love so easily,
after you did little things for them at the hospital.  She
wouldn't mind the hospital so much now.  Men were so easily
stirred when they had been ill.  They fell into a clever girl's
hand just like the ripe peaches at Tara when the trees were gently
shaken.

She went back toward her father with the reviving liquor, thanking
Heaven that the famous O'Hara head had not been able to survive
last night's bout and wondering suddenly if Rhett Butler had had
anything to do with that.



