CHAPTER XXXVIII


Scarlett saw it all, lived with it by day, took it to bed with her
at night, dreading always what might happen next.  She knew that
she and Frank were already in the Yankees' black books, because of
Tony, and disaster might descend on them at any hour.  But, now of
all times, she could not afford to be pushed back to her
beginnings--not now with a baby coming, the mill just commencing to
pay and Tara depending on her for money until the cotton came in in
the fall.  Oh, suppose she should lose everything!  Suppose she
should have to start all over again with only her puny weapons
against this mad world!  To have to pit her red lips and green eyes
and her shrewd shallow brain against the Yankees and everything the
Yankees stood for.  Weary with dread, she felt that she would
rather kill herself than try to make a new beginning.

In the ruin and chaos of that spring of 1866, she single mindedly
turned her energies to making the mill pay.  There was money in
Atlanta.  The wave of rebuilding was giving her the opportunity she
wanted and she knew she could make money if only she could stay out
of jail.  But, she told herself time and again, she would have to
walk easily, gingerly, be meek under insults, yielding to
injustices, never giving offense to anyone, black or white, who
might do her harm.  She hated the impudent free negroes as much as
anyone and her flesh crawled with fury every time she heard their
insulting remarks and high-pitched laughter as she went by.  But
she never even gave them a glance of contempt.  She hated the
Carpetbaggers and Scallawags who were getting rich with ease while
she struggled, but she said nothing in condemnation of them.  No
one in Atlanta could have loathed the Yankees more than she, for
the very sight of a blue uniform made her sick with rage, but even
in the privacy of her family she kept silent about them.

I won't be a big-mouthed fool, she thought grimly.  Let others
break their hearts over the old days and the men who'll never come
back.  Let others burn with fury over the Yankee rule and losing
the ballot.  Let others go to jail for speaking their minds and get
themselves hanged for being in the Ku Klux Klan.  (Oh, what a
dreaded name that was, almost as terrifying to Scarlett as to the
negroes.)  Let other women be proud that their husbands belonged.
Thank God, Frank had never been mixed up in it!  Let others stew
and fume and plot and plan about things they could not help.  What
did the past matter compared with the tense present and the dubious
future?  What did the ballot matter when bread, a roof and staying
out of jail were the real problems?  And, please God, just let me
stay out of trouble until June!

Only till June!  By that month Scarlett knew she would be forced to
retire into Aunt Pitty's house and remain secluded there until
after her child was born.  Already people were criticizing her for
appearing in public when she was in such a condition.  No lady ever
showed herself when she was pregnant.  Already Frank and Pitty were
begging her not to expose herself--and them--to embarrassment and
she had promised them to stop work in June.

Only till June!  By June she must have the mill well enough
established for her to leave it.  By June she must have money
enough to give her at least some little protection against
misfortune.  So much to do and so little time to do it!  She wished
for more hours of the day and counted the minutes, as she strained
forward feverishly in her pursuit of money and still more money.

Because she nagged the timid Frank, the store was doing better now
and he was even collecting some of the old bills.  But it was the
sawmill on which her hopes were pinned.  Atlanta these days was
like a giant plant which had been cut to the ground but now was
springing up again with sturdier shoots, thicker foliage, more
numerous branches.  The demand for building materials was far
greater than could be supplied.  Prices of lumber, brick and stone
soared and Scarlett kept the mill running from dawn until lantern
light.

A part of every day she spent at the mill, prying into everything,
doing her best to check the thievery she felt sure was going on.
But most of the time she was riding about the town, making the
rounds of builders, contractors and carpenters, even calling on
strangers she had heard might build at future dates, cajoling them
into promises of buying from her and her only.

Soon she was a familiar sight on Atlanta's streets, sitting in her
buggy beside the dignified, disapproving old darky driver, a lap
robe pulled high about her, her little mittened hands clasped in
her lap.  Aunt Pitty had made her a pretty green mantelet which hid
her figure and a green pancake hat which matched her eyes, and she
always wore these becoming garments on her business calls.  A faint
dab of rouge on her cheeks and a fainter fragrance of cologne made
her a charming picture, as long as she did not alight from the
buggy and show her figure.  And there was seldom any need for this,
for she smiled and beckoned and the men came quickly to the buggy
and frequently stood bareheaded in the rain to talk business with
her.

She was not the only one who had seen the opportunities for making
money out of lumber, but she did not fear her competitors.  She
knew with conscious pride in her own smartness that she was the
equal of any of them.  She was Gerald's own daughter and the shrewd
trading instinct she had inherited was now sharpened by her needs.

At first the other dealers had laughed at her, laughed with good-
natured contempt at the very idea of a woman in business.  But now
they did not laugh.  They swore silently as they saw her ride by.
The fact that she was a woman frequently worked in her favor, for
she could upon occasion look so helpless and appealing that she
melted hearts.  With no difficulty whatever she could mutely convey
the impression of a brave but timid lady, forced by brutal
circumstance into a distasteful position, a helpless little lady
who would probably starve if customers didn't buy her lumber.  But
when ladylike airs failed to get results she was coldly businesslike
and willingly undersold her competitors at a loss to herself if it
would bring her a new customer.  She was not above selling a poor
grade of lumber for the price of good lumber if she thought she
would not be detected, and she had no scruples about black-guarding
the other lumber dealers.  With every appearance of reluctance at
disclosing the unpleasant truth, she would sigh and tell prospective
customers that her competitors' lumber was far too high in price,
rotten, full of knot holes and in general of deplorably poor
quality.

The first time Scarlett lied in this fashion she felt disconcerted
and guilty--disconcerted because the lie sprang so easily and
naturally to her lips, guilty because the thought flashed into her
mind:  What would Mother say?

There was no doubt what Ellen would say to a daughter who told lies
and engaged in sharp practices.  She would be stunned and
incredulous and would speak gentle words that stung despite their
gentleness, would talk of honor and honesty and truth and duty to
one's neighbor.  Momentarily, Scarlett cringed as she pictured the
look on her mother's face.  And then the picture faded, blotted out
by an impulse, hard, unscrupulous and greedy, which had been born
in the lean days at Tara and was now strengthened by the present
uncertainty of life.  So she passed this milestone as she had
passed others before it--with a sigh that she was not as Ellen
would like her to be, a shrug and the repetition of her unfailing
charm:  "I'll think of all this later."

But she never again thought of Ellen in connection with her
business practices, never again regretted any means she used to
take trade away from other lumber dealers.  She knew she was
perfectly safe in lying about them.  Southern chivalry protected
her.  A Southern lady could lie about a gentleman but a Southern
gentleman could not lie about a lady or, worse still, call the lady
a liar.  Other lumbermen could only fume inwardly and state
heatedly, in the bosoms of their families, that they wished to God
Mrs. Kennedy was a man for just about five minutes.

One poor white who operated a mill on the Decatur road did try to
fight Scarlett with her own weapons, saying openly that she was a
liar and a swindler.  But it hurt him rather than helped, for
everyone was appalled that even a poor white should say such
shocking things about a lady of good family, even when the lady was
conducting herself in such an unwomanly way.  Scarlett bore his
remarks with silent dignity and, as time went by, she turned all
her attention to him and his customers.  She undersold him so
relentlessly and delivered, with secret groans, such an excellent
quality of lumber to prove her probity that he was soon bankrupt.
Then, to Frank's horror, she triumphantly bought his mill at her
own price.

Once in her possession there arose the perplexing problem of
finding a trustworthy man to put in charge of it.  She did not want
another man like Mr. Johnson.  She knew that despite all her
watchfulness he was still selling her lumber behind her back, but
she thought it would be easy to find the right sort of man.  Wasn't
everybody as poor as Job's turkey, and weren't the streets full of
men, some of them formerly rich, who were without work?  The day
never went by that Frank did not give money to some hungry ex-
soldier or that Pitty and Cookie did not wrap up food for gaunt
beggars.

But Scarlett, for some reason she could not understand, did not
want any of these.  "I don't want men who haven't found something
to do after a year," she thought.  "If they haven't adjusted to
peace yet, they couldn't adjust to me.  And they all look so
hangdog and licked.  I don't want a man who's licked.  I want
somebody who's smart and energetic like Renny or Tommy Wellburn or
Kells Whiting or one of the Simmons boys or--or any of that tribe.
They haven't got that I-don't-care-about-anything look the soldiers
had right after the surrender.  They look like they cared a heap
about a heap of things."

But to her surprise the Simmons boys, who had started a brick kiln,
and Kells Whiting, who was selling a preparation made up in his
mother's kitchen, that was guaranteed to straighten the kinkiest
negro hair in six applications, smiled politely, thanked her and
refused.  It was the same with the dozen others she approached.  In
desperation she raised the wage she was offering but she was still
refused.  One of Mrs. Merriwether's nephews observed impertinently
that while he didn't especially enjoy driving a dray, it was his
own dray and he would rather get somewhere under his own steam than
Scarlett's.

One afternoon, Scarlett pulled up her buggy beside Rene Picard's
pie wagon and hailed Rene and the crippled Tommy Wellburn, who was
catching a ride home with his friend.

"Look here, Renny, why don't you come and work for me?  Managing a
mill is a sight more respectable than driving a pie wagon.  I'd
think you'd be ashamed."

"Me, I am dead to shame," grinned Rene.  "Who would be respectable?
All of my days I was respectable until ze war set me free lak ze
darkies.  Nevaire again must I be deegneefied and full of ennui.
Free lak ze bird!  I lak my pie wagon.  I lak my mule.  I lak ze
dear Yankees who so kindly buy ze pie of Madame Belle Mere.  No, my
Scarlett, I must be ze King of ze Pies.  Eet ees my destiny!  Lak
Napoleon, I follow my star."  He flourished his whip dramatically.

"But you weren't raised to sell pies any more than Tommy was raised
to wrastle with a bunch of wild Irish masons.  My kind of work is
more--"

"And I suppose you were raised to run a lumber mill," said Tommy,
the corners of his mouth twitching.  "Yes, I can just see little
Scarlett at her mother's knee, lisping her lesson, 'Never sell good
lumber if you can get a better price for bad.'"

Rene roared at this, his small monkey eyes dancing with glee as he
whacked Tommy on his twisted back.

"Don't be impudent," said Scarlett coldly, for she saw little humor
in Tommy's remark.  "Of course, I wasn't raised to run a sawmill."

"I didn't mean to be impudent.  But you are running a sawmill,
whether you were raised to it or not.  And running it very well,
too.  Well, none of us, as far as I can see, are doing what we
intended to do right now, but I think we'll make out just the same.
It's a poor person and a poor nation that sits down and cries
because life isn't precisely what they expected it to be.  Why
don't you pick up some enterprising Carpetbagger to work for you,
Scarlett?  The woods are full of them, God knows."

"I don't want a Carpetbagger.  Carpetbaggers will steal anything
that isn't red hot or nailed down.  If they amounted to anything
they'd have stayed where they were, instead of coming down here to
pick our bones.  I want a nice man, from nice folks, who is smart
and honest and energetic and--"

"You don't want much.  And you won't get it for the wage you're
offering.  All the men of that description, barring the badly
maimed ones, have already got something to do.  They may be round
pegs in square holes but they've all got something to do.
Something of their own that they'd rather do than work for a
woman."

"Men haven't got much sense, have they, when you get down to rock
bottom?"

"Maybe not but they've got a heap of pride," said Tommy soberly.

"Pride!  Pride tastes awfully good, especially when the crust is
flaky and you put meringue on it," said Scarlett tartly.

The two men laughed, a bit unwillingly, and it seemed to Scarlett
that they drew together in united masculine disapproval of her.
What Tommy said was true, she thought, running over in her mind the
men she had approached and the ones she intended to approach.  They
were all busy, busy at something, working hard, working harder than
they would have dreamed possible in the days before the war.  They
weren't doing what they wanted to do perhaps, or what was easiest
to do, or what they had been reared to do, but they were doing
something.  Times were too hard for men to be choosy.  And if they
were sorrowing for lost hopes, longing for lost ways of living, no
one knew it but they.  They were fighting a new war, a harder war
than the one before.  And they were caring about life again, caring
with the same urgency and the same violence that animated them
before the war had cut their lives in two.

"Scarlett," said Tommy awkwardly, "I do hate to ask a favor of you,
after being impudent to you, but I'm going to ask it just the same.
Maybe it would help you anyway.  My brother-in-law, Hugh Elsing,
isn't doing any too well peddling kindling wood.  Everybody except
the Yankees goes out and collects his own kindling wood.  And I
know things are mighty hard with the whole Elsing family.  I--I do
what I can, but you see I've got Fanny to support, and then, too,
I've got my mother and two widowed sisters down in Sparta to look
after.  Hugh is nice, and you wanted a nice man, and he's from nice
folks, as you know, and he's honest."

"But--well, Hugh hasn't got much gumption or else he'd make a
success of his kindling."

Tommy shrugged.

"You've got a hard way of looking at things, Scarlett," he said.
"But you think Hugh over.  You could go far and do worse.  I think
his honesty and his willingness will outweigh his lack of
gumption."

Scarlett did not answer, for she did not want to be too rude.  But
to her mind there were few, if any, qualities that out-weighed
gumption.

After she had unsuccessfully canvassed the town and refused the
importuning of many eager Carpetbaggers, she finally decided to
take Tommy's suggestion and ask Hugh Elsing.  He had been a dashing
and resourceful officer during the war, but two severe wounds and
four years of fighting seemed to have drained him of all his
resourcefulness, leaving him to face the rigors of peace as
bewildered as a child.  There was a lost-dog look in his eyes these
days as he went about peddling his firewood, and he was not at all
the kind of man she had hoped to get.

"He's stupid," she thought.  "He doesn't know a thing about
business and I'll bet he can't add two and two.  And I doubt if
he'll ever learn.  But, at least, he's honest and won't swindle
me."

Scarlett had little use these days for honesty in herself, but the
less she valued it in herself the more she was beginning to value
it in others.

"It's a pity Johnnie Gallegher is tied up with Tommy Wellburn on
that construction work," she thought.  "He's just the kind of man I
want.  He's hard as nails and slick as a snake, but he'd be honest
if it paid him to be honest.  I understand him and he understands
me and we could do business together very well.  Maybe I can get
him when the hotel is finished and till then I'll have to make out
on Hugh and Mr. Johnson.  If I put Hugh in charge of the new mill
and leave Mr. Johnson at the old one, I can stay in town and see to
the selling while they handle the milling and hauling.  Until I can
get Johnnie I'll have to risk Mr. Johnson robbing me if I stay in
town all the time.  If only he wasn't a thief!  I believe I'll
build a lumber yard on half that lot Charles left me.  If only
Frank didn't holler so loud about me building a saloon on the other
half!  Well, I shall build the saloon just as soon as I get enough
money ahead, no matter how he takes on.  If only Frank wasn't so
thin skinned.  Oh, God, if only I wasn't going to have a baby at
this of all times!  In a little while I'll be so big I can't go
out.  Oh, God, if only I wasn't going to have a baby!  And oh, God,
if the damned Yankees will only let me alone!  If--"

If!  If!  If!  There were so many ifs in life, never any certainty
of anything, never any sense of security, always the dread of
losing everything and being cold and hungry again.  Of course,
Frank was making a little more money now, but Frank was always
ailing with colds and frequently forced to stay in bed for days.
Suppose he should become an invalid.  No, she could not afford to
count on Frank for much.  She must not count on anything or anybody
but herself.  And what she could earn seemed so pitiably small.
Oh, what would she do if the Yankees came and took it all away from
her?  If!  If!  If!

Half of what she made every month went to Will at Tara, part to
Rhett to repay his loan and the rest she hoarded.  No miser ever
counted his gold oftener than she and no miser ever had greater
fear of losing it.  She would not put the money in the bank, for it
might fail or the Yankees might confiscate it.  So she carried what
she could with her, tucked into her corset, and hid small wads of
bills about the house, under loose bricks on the hearth, in her
scrap bag, between the pages of the Bible.  And her temper grew
shorter and shorter as the weeks went by, for every dollar she
saved would be just one more dollar to lose if disaster descended.

Frank, Pitty and the servants bore her outbursts with maddening
kindness, attributing her bad disposition to her pregnancy, never
realizing the true cause.  Frank knew that pregnant women must be
humored, so he put his pride in his pocket and said nothing more
about her running the mills and her going about town at such a
time, as no lady should do.  Her conduct was a constant
embarrassment to him but he reckoned he could endure it for a while
longer.  After the baby came, he knew she would be the same sweet,
feminine girl he had courted.  But in spite of everything he did to
appease her, she continued to have her tantrums and often he
thought she acted like one possessed.

No one seemed to realize what really possessed her, what drove her
like a mad woman.  It was a passion to get her affairs in order
before she had to retire behind doors, to have as much money as
possible in case the deluge broke upon her again, to have a stout
levee of cash against the rising tide of Yankee hate.  Money was
the obsession dominating her mind these days.  When she thought of
the baby at all, it was with baffled rage at the untimeliness of it.

"Death and taxes and childbirth!  There's never any convenient time
for any of them!"



Atlanta had been scandalized enough when Scarlett, a woman, began
operating the sawmill but, as time went by, the town decided there
was no limit to what she would do.  Her sharp trading was shocking,
especially when her poor mother had been a Robillard, and it was
positively indecent the way she kept on going about the streets
when everyone knew she was pregnant.  No respectable white woman
and few negroes ever went outside their homes from the moment they
first suspected they were with child, and Mrs. Merriwether declared
indignantly that from the way Scarlett was acting she was likely to
have the baby on the public streets.

But all the previous criticism of her conduct was as nothing
compared with the buzz of gossip that now went through the town.
Scarlett was not only trafficking with the Yankees but was giving
every appearance of really liking it!

Mrs. Merriwether and many other Southerners were also doing
business with the newcomers from the North, but the difference was
that they did not like it and plainly showed they did not like it.
And Scarlett did, or seemed to, which was just as bad.  She had
actually taken tea with the Yankee officers' wives in their homes!
In fact, she had done practically everything short of inviting them
into her own home, and the town guessed she would do even that,
except for Aunt Pitty and Frank.

Scarlett knew the town was talking but she did not care, could not
afford to care.  She still hated the Yankees with as fierce a hate
as on the day when they tried to burn Tara, but she could dissemble
that hate.  She knew that if she was going to make money, she would
have to make it out of the Yankees, and she had learned that
buttering them up with smiles and kind words was the surest way to
get their business for her mill.

Some day when she was very rich and her money was hidden away where
the Yankees could not find it, then, then she would tell them
exactly what she thought of them, tell them how she hated and
loathed and despised them.  And what a joy that would be!  But
until that time came, it was just plain common sense to get along
with them.  And if that was hypocrisy, let Atlanta make the most of
it.

She discovered that making friends with the Yankee officers was as
easy as shooting birds on the ground.  They were lonely exiles in a
hostile land and many of them were starved for polite feminine
associations in a town where respectable women drew their skirts
aside in passing and looked as if they would like to spit on them.
Only the prostitutes and the negro women had kind words for them.
But Scarlett was obviously a lady and a lady of family, for all
that she worked, and they thrilled to her flashing smile and the
pleasant light in her green eyes.

Frequently when Scarlett sat in her buggy talking to them and
making her dimples play, her dislike for them rose so strong that
it was hard not to curse them to their faces.  But she restrained
herself and she found that twisting Yankee men around her finger
was no more difficult than that same diversion had been with
Southern men.  Only this was no diversion but a grim business.  The
role she enacted was that of a refined sweet Southern lady in
distress.  With an air of dignified reserve she was able to keep
her victims at their proper distance, but there was nevertheless a
graciousness in her manner which left a certain warmth in the
Yankee officers' memories of Mrs. Kennedy.

This warmth was very profitable--as Scarlett had intended it to be.
Many of the officers of the garrison, not knowing how long they
would be stationed in Atlanta, had sent for their wives and
families.  As the hotels and boarding houses were overflowing, they
were building small houses; and they were glad to buy their lumber
from the gracious Mrs. Kennedy, who treated them more politely than
anyone else in town.  The Carpetbaggers and Scallawags also, who
were building fine homes and stores and hotels with their new
wealth, found it more pleasant to do business with her than with
the former Confederate soldiers who were courteous but with a
courtesy more formal and cold than outspoken hate.

So, because she was pretty and charming and could appear quite
helpless and forlorn at times, they gladly patronized her lumber
yard and also Frank's store, feeling that they should help a plucky
little woman who apparently had only a shiftless husband to support
her.  And Scarlett, watching the business grow, felt that she was
safeguarding not only the present with Yankee money but the future
with Yankee friends.

Keeping her relations with the Yankee officers on the plane she
desired was easier than she expected, for they all seemed to be in
awe of Southern ladies, but Scarlett soon found that their wives
presented a problem she had not anticipated.  Contacts with the
Yankee women were not of her seeking.  She would have been glad to
avoid them but she could not, for the officers' wives were
determined to meet her.  They had an avid curiosity about the South
and Southern women, and Scarlett gave them their first opportunity
to satisfy it.  Other Atlanta women would have nothing to do with
them and even refused to bow to them in church, so when business
brought Scarlett to their homes, she was like an answer to prayer.
Often when Scarlett sat in her buggy in front of a Yankee home
talking of uprights and shingles with the man of the house, the
wife came out to join in the conversation or insist that she come
inside for a cup of tea.  Scarlett seldom refused, no matter how
distasteful the idea might be, for she always hoped to have an
opportunity to suggest tactfully that they do their trading at
Frank's store.  But her self-control was severely tested many
times, because of the personal questions they asked and because of
the smug and condescending attitude they displayed toward all
things Southern.

Accepting Uncle Tom's Cabin as revelation second only to the Bible,
the Yankee women all wanted to know about the bloodhounds which
every Southerner kept to track down runaway slaves.  And they never
believed her when she told them she had only seen one bloodhound in
all her life and it was a small mild dog and not a huge ferocious
mastiff.  They wanted to know about the dreadful branding irons
which planters used to mark the faces of their slaves and the cat-
o'-nine-tails with which they beat them to death, and they
evidenced what Scarlett felt was a very nasty and ill-bred interest
in slave concubinage.  Especially did she resent this in view of
the enormous increase in mulatto babies in Atlanta since the Yankee
soldiers had settled in the town.

Any other Atlanta woman would have expired in rage at having to
listen to such bigoted ignorance but Scarlett managed to control
herself.  Assisting her in this was the fact that they aroused her
contempt more than her anger.  After all, they were Yankees and no
one expected anything better from Yankees.  So their unthinking
insults to her state, her people and their morals, glanced off and
never struck deep enough to cause her more than a well-concealed
sneer until an incident occurred which made her sick with rage and
showed her, if she needed any showing, how wide was the gap between
North and South and how utterly impossible it was to bridge it.

While driving home with Uncle Peter one afternoon, she passed the
house into which were crowded the families of three officers who
were building their own homes with Scarlett's lumber.  The three
wives were standing in the walk as she drove by and they waved to
her to stop.  Coming out to the carriage block they greeted her in
accents that always made her feel that one could forgive Yankees
almost anything except their voices.

"You are just the person I want to see, Mrs. Kennedy," said a tall
thin woman from Maine.  "I want to get some information about this
benighted town."

Scarlett swallowed the insult to Atlanta with the contempt it
deserved and smiled her best.

"And what can I tell you?"

"My nurse, my Bridget, has gone back North.  She said she wouldn't
stay another day down here among the 'naygurs' as she calls them.
And the children are just driving me distracted!  Do tell me how to
go about getting another nurse.  I do not know where to apply."

"That shouldn't be difficult," said Scarlett and laughed.  "If you
can find a darky just in from the country who hasn't been spoiled
by the Freedmen's Bureau, you'll have the best kind of servant
possible.  Just stand at your gate here and ask every darky woman
who passes and I'm sure--"

The three women broke into indignant outcries.

"Do you think I'd trust my babies to a black nigger?" cried the
Maine woman.  "I want a good Irish girl."

"I'm afraid you'll find no Irish servants in Atlanta," answered
Scarlett, coolness in her voice.  "Personally, I've never seen a
white servant and I shouldn't care to have one in my house.  And,"
she could not keep a slight note of sarcasm from her words, "I
assure you that darkies aren't cannibals and are quite trustworthy."

"Goodness, no!  I wouldn't have one in my house.  The idea!"

"I wouldn't trust them any farther than I could see them and as for
letting them handle my babies . . ."

Scarlett thought of the kind, gnarled hands of Mammy worn rough in
Ellen's service and hers and Wade's.  What did these strangers know
of black hands, how dear and comforting they could be, how
unerringly they knew how to soothe, to pat, to fondle?  She laughed
shortly.

"It's strange you should feel that way when it was you all who
freed them."

"Lor'!  Not I, dearie," laughed the Maine woman.  "I never saw a
nigger till I came South last month and I don't care if I never
see another.  They give me the creeps.  I wouldn't trust one of
them. . . ."

For some moments Scarlett had been conscious that Uncle Peter was
breathing hard and sitting up very straight as he stared steadily
at the horse's ears.  Her attention was called to him more forcibly
when the Maine woman broke off suddenly with a laugh and pointed
him out to her companions.

"Look at that old nigger swell up like a toad," she giggled.  "I'll
bet he's an old pet of yours, isn't he?  You Southerners don't know
how to treat niggers.  You spoil them to death."

Peter sucked in his breath and his wrinkled brow showed deep
furrows but he kept his eyes straight ahead.  He had never had the
term "nigger" applied to him by a white person in all his life.  By
other negroes, yes.  But never by a white person.  And to be called
untrustworthy and an "old pet," he, Peter, who had been the
dignified mainstay of the Hamilton family for years!

Scarlett felt, rather than saw, the black chin begin to shake with
hurt pride, and a killing rage swept over her.  She had listened
with calm contempt while these women had underrated the Confederate
Army, blackguarded Jeff Davis and accused Southerners of murder and
torture of their slaves.  If it were to her advantage she would
have endured insults about her own virtue and honesty.  But the
knowledge that they had hurt the faithful old darky with their
stupid remarks fired her like a match in gunpowder.  For a moment
she looked at the big horse pistol in Peter's belt and her hands
itched for the feel of it.  They deserved killing, these insolent,
ignorant, arrogant conquerors.  But she bit down on her teeth until
her jaw muscles stood out, reminding herself that the time had not
yet come when she could tell the Yankees just what she thought of
them.  Some day, yes.  My God, yes!  But not yet.

"Uncle Peter is one of our family," she said, her voice shaking.
"Good afternoon.  Drive on, Peter."

Peter laid the whip on the horse so suddenly that the startled
animal jumped forward and as the buggy jounced off, Scarlett heard
the Maine woman say with puzzled accents:  "Her family?  You don't
suppose she meant a relative?  He's exceedingly black."

God damn them!  They ought to be wiped off the face of the earth.
If ever I get money enough, I'll spit in all their faces!  I'll--

She glanced at Peter and saw that a tear was trickling down his
nose.  Instantly a passion of tenderness, of grief for his
humiliation swamped her, made her eyes sting.  It was as though
someone had been senselessly brutal to a child.  Those women had
hurt Uncle Peter--Peter who had been through the Mexican War with
old Colonel Hamilton, Peter who had held his master in his arms
when he died, who had raised Melly and Charles and looked after the
feckless, foolish Pittypat, "pertecked" her when she refugeed, and
"'quired" a horse to bring her back from Macon through a war-torn
country after the surrender.  And they said they wouldn't trust
niggers!

"Peter," she said, her voice breaking as she put her hand on his
thin arm.  "I'm ashamed of you for crying.  What do you care?  They
aren't anything but damned Yankees!"

"Dey talked in front of me lak Ah wuz a mule an' couldn' unnerstan'
dem--lak Ah wuz a Affikun an' din' know whut dey wuz talkin'
'bout," said Peter, giving a tremendous sniff.  "An' dey call me a
nigger an' Ah' ain' never been call a nigger by no w'ite folks, an'
dey call me a ole pet an' say dat niggers ain' ter be trus'ed!  Me
not ter be trus'ed!  Why, w'en de ole Cunnel wuz dyin' he say ter
me, 'You, Peter!  You look affer mah chillun.  Tek keer of yo'
young Miss Pittypat,' he say, ''cause she ain' got no mo' sense dan
a hoppergrass.'  An' Ah done tek keer of her good all dese y'ars--"

"Nobody but the Angel Gabriel could have done better," said
Scarlett soothingly.  "We just couldn't have lived without you."

"Yas'm, thankee kinely, Ma'm.  Ah knows it an' you knows it, but
dem Yankee folks doan know it an' dey doan want ter know it.
Huccome dey come mixin' in our bizness, Miss Scarlett?  Dey doan
unnerstan' us Confedruts."

Scarlett said nothing for she was still burning with the wrath she
had not exploded in the Yankee women's faces.  The two drove home
in silence.  Peter's sniffles stopped and his underlip began to
protrude gradually until it stuck out alarmingly.  His indignation
was mounting, now that the initial hurt was subsiding.

Scarlett thought:  What damnably queer people Yankees are!  Those
women seemed to think that because Uncle Peter was black, he had no
ears to hear with and no feelings, as tender as their own, to be
hurt.  They did not know that negroes had to be handled gently, as
though they were children, directed, praised, petted, scolded.
They didn't understand negroes or the relations between the negroes
and their former masters.  Yet they had fought a war to free them.
And having freed them, they didn't want to have anything to do with
them, except to use them to terrorize Southerners.  They didn't
like them, didn't trust them, didn't understand them, and yet their
constant cry was that Southerners didn't know how to get along with
them.

Not trust a darky!  Scarlett trusted them far more than most white
people, certainly more than she trusted any Yankee.  There were
qualities of loyalty and tirelessness and love in them that no
strain could break, no money could buy.  She thought of the
faithful few who remained at Tara in the face of the Yankee
invasion when they could have fled or joined the troops for lives
of leisure.  But they had stayed.  She thought of Dilcey toiling in
the cotton fields beside her, of Pork risking his life in
neighboring hen houses that the family might eat, of Mammy coming
to Atlanta with her to keep her from doing wrong.  She thought of
the servants of her neighbors who had stood loyally beside their
white owners, protecting their mistresses while the men were at the
front, refugeeing with them through the terrors of the war, nursing
the wounded, burying the dead, comforting the bereaved, working,
begging, stealing to keep food on the tables.  And even now, with
the Freedmen's Bureau promising all manner of wonders, they still
stuck with their white folks and worked much harder than they ever
worked in slave times.  But the Yankees didn't understand these
things and would never understand them.

"Yet they set you free," she said aloud.

"No, Ma'm!  Dey din' sot me free.  Ah wouldn' let no sech trash sot
me free," said Peter indignantly.  "Ah still b'longs ter Miss Pitty
an' w'en Ah dies she gwine lay me in de Hamilton buhyin' groun'
whar Ah b'longs. . . .  Mah Miss gwine ter be in a state w'en Ah
tells her 'bout how you let dem Yankee women 'sult me."

"I did no such thing!" cried Scarlett, startled.

"You did so, Miss Scarlett," said Peter, pushing out his lip even
farther.  "De pint is, needer you nor me had no bizness bein' wid
Yankees, so dey could 'sult me.  Ef you hadn't talked wid dem, dey
wouldn' had no chance ter treat me lak a mule or a Affikun.  An'
you din' tek up fer me, needer."

"I did, too!" said Scarlett, stung by the criticism.  "Didn't I
tell them you were one of the family?"

"Dat ain' tekkin' up.  Dat's jes' a fac'," said Peter.  "Miss
Scarlett, you ain' got no bizness havin' no truck wid Yankees.
Ain' no other ladies doin' it.  You wouldn' ketch Miss Pitty wipin'
her lil shoes on sech trash.  An' she ain' gwine lake it w'en she
hear 'bout whut dey said 'bout me."

Peter's criticism hurt worse than anything Frank or Aunt Pitty or
the neighbors had said and it so annoyed her she longed to shake
the old darky until his toothless gums clapped together.  What
Peter said was true but she hated to hear it from a negro and a
family negro, too.  Not to stand high in the opinion of one's
servants was as humiliating a thing as could happen to a
Southerner.

"A ole pet!" Peter grumbled.  "Ah specs Miss Pitty ain't gwine want
me ter drive you roun' no mo' after dat.  No, Ma'm!"

"Aunt Pitty will want you to drive me as usual," she said sternly,
"so let's hear no more about it."

"Ah'll git a mizry in mak back," warned Peter darkly.  "Mah back
huttin' me so bad dis minute Ah kain sceercely set up.  Mah Miss
ain' gwine want me ter do no drivin' w'en Ah got a mizry. . . .
Miss Scarlett, it ain' gwine do you no good ter stan' high wid de
Yankees an' de w'ite trash, ef yo' own folks doan 'prove of you."

That was as accurate a summing up of the situation as could be made
and Scarlett relapsed into infuriated silence.  Yes, the conquerors
did approve of her and her family and her neighbors did not.  She
knew all the things the town was saying about her.  And now even
Peter disapproved of her to the point of not caring to be seen in
public with her.  That was the last straw.

Heretofore she had been careless of public opinion, careless and a
little contemptuous.  But Peter's words caused fierce resentment to
burn in her breast, drove her to a defensive position, made her
suddenly dislike her neighbors as much as she disliked the Yankees.

"Why should they care what I do?" she thought.  "They must think I
enjoy associating with Yankees and working like a field hand.
They're just making a hard job harder for me.  But I don't care
what they think.  I won't let myself care.  I can't afford to care
now.  But some day--some day--"

Oh some day!  When there was security in her world again, then she
would sit back and fold her hands and be a great lady as Ellen had
been.  She would be helpless and sheltered, as a lady should be,
and then everyone would approve of her.  Oh, how grand she would be
when she had money again!  Then she could permit herself to be kind
and gentle, as Ellen had been, and thoughtful of other people and
of the proprieties, to.  She would not be driven by fears, day and
night, and life would be a placid, unhurried affair.  She would
have time to play with her children and listen to their lessons.
There would be long warm afternoons when ladies would call and,
amid the rustlings of taffeta petticoats and the rhythmic harsh
cracklings of palmetto fans, she would serve tea and delicious
sandwiches and cakes and leisurely gossip the hours away.  And she
would be so kind to those who were suffering misfortune, take
baskets to the poor and soup and jelly to the sick and "air" those
less fortunate in her fine carriage.  She would be a lady in the
true Southern manner, as her mother had been.  And then, everyone
would love her as they had loved Ellen and they would say how
unselfish she was and call her "Lady Bountiful."

Her pleasure in these thoughts of the future was undimmed by any
realization that she had no real desire to be unselfish or
charitable or kind.  All she wanted was the reputation for
possessing these qualities.  But the meshes of her brain were too
wide, too coarse, to filter such small differences.  It was enough
that some day, when she had money, everyone would approve of her.

Some day!  But not now.  Not now, in spite of what anyone might say
of her.  Now, there was no time to be a great lady.

Peter was as good as his word.  Aunt Pitty did get into a state,
and Peter's misery developed overnight to such proportions that he
never drove the buggy again.  Thereafter Scarlett drove alone and
the calluses which had begun to leave her palms came back again.

So the spring months went by, the cool rains of April passing into
the warm balm of green May weather.  The weeks were packed with
work and worry and the handicaps of increasing pregnancy, with old
friends growing cooler and her family increasingly more kind, more
maddeningly solicitous and more completely blind to what was
driving her.  During those days of anxiety and struggle there was
only one dependable, understanding person in her world, and that
person was Rhett Butler.  It was odd that he of all people should
appear in this light, for he was as unstable as quicksilver and as
perverse as a demon fresh from the pit.  But he gave her sympathy,
something she had never had from anyone and never expected from
him.

Frequently he was out of town on those mysterious trips to New
Orleans which he never explained but which she felt sure, in a
faintly jealous way, were connected with a woman--or women.  But
after Uncle Peter's refusal to drive her, he remained in Atlanta
for longer and longer intervals.

While in town, he spent most of his time gambling in the rooms
above the Girl of the Period Saloon, or in Belle Watling's bar
hobnobbing with the wealthier of the Yankees and Carpetbaggers in
money-making schemes which made the townspeople detest him even
more than his cronies.  He did not call at the house now, probably
in deference to the feelings of Frank and Pitty who would have been
outraged at a male caller while Scarlett was in a delicate
condition.  But she met him by accident almost every day.  Time and
again, he came riding up to her buggy when she was passing through
lonely stretches of Peachtree road and Decatur road where the mills
lay.  He always drew rein and talked and sometimes he tied his
horse to the back of the buggy and drove her on her rounds.  She
tired more easily these days than she liked to admit and she was
always silently grateful when he took the reins.  He always left
her before they reached the town again but all Atlanta knew about
their meetings, and it gave the gossips something new to add to the
long list of Scarlett's affronts to the proprieties.

She wondered occasionally if these meetings were not more than
accidental.  They became more and more numerous as the weeks went
by and as the tension in town heightened over negro outrages.  But
why did he seek her out, now of all times when she looked her
worst?  Certainly he had no designs upon her if he had ever had
any, and she was beginning to doubt even this.  It had been months
since he made any joking references to their distressing scene at
the Yankee jail.  He never mentioned Ashley and her love for him,
or made any coarse and ill-bred remarks about "coveting her."  She
thought it best to let sleeping dogs lie, so she did not ask for an
explanation of their frequent meetings.  And finally she decided
that, because he had little to do besides gamble and had few enough
nice friends in Atlanta, he sought her out solely for companionship's
sake.

Whatever his reason might be, she found his company most welcome.
He listened to her moans about lost customers and bad debts, the
swindling ways of Mr. Johnson and the incompetency of Hugh.  He
applauded her triumphs, where Frank merely smiled indulgently and
Pitty said "Dear me!" in a dazed manner.  She was sure that he
frequently threw business her way, for he knew all the rich Yankees
and Carpetbaggers intimately, but he always denied being helpful.
She knew him for what he was and she never trusted him, but her
spirits always rose with pleasure at the sight of him riding around
the curve of a shady road on his big black horse.  When he climbed
into the buggy and took the reins from her and threw her some
impertinent remark, she felt young and gay and attractive again,
for all her worries and her increasing bulk.  She could talk to him
about almost everything, with no care for concealing her motives or
her real opinions and she never ran out of things to say as she did
with Frank--or even with Ashley, if she must be honest with
herself.  But of course, in all her conversations with Ashley there
were so many things which could not be said, for honor's sake, that
the sheer force of them inhibited other remarks.  It was comforting
to have a friend like Rhett, now that for some unaccountable reason
he had decided to be on good behavior with her.  Very comforting,
for she had so few friends these days.

"Rhett," she asked stormily, shortly after Uncle Peter's ultimatum,
"why do folks in this town treat me so scurvily and talk about me
so?  It's a toss-up who they talk worst about, me or the
Carpetbaggers!  I've minded my own business and haven't done
anything wrong and--"

"If you haven't done anything wrong, it's because you haven't had
the opportunity, and perhaps they dimly realize it."

"Oh, do be serious!  They make me so mad.  All I've done is try to
make a little money and--"

"All you've done is to be different from other women and you've
made a little success at it.  As I've told you before, that is the
one unforgivable sin in any society.  Be different and be damned!
Scarlett, the mere fact that you've made a success of your mill is
an insult to every man who hasn't succeeded.  Remember, a well-bred
female's place is in the home and she should know nothing about
this busy, brutal world."

"But if I had stayed in my home, I wouldn't have had any home left
to stay in."

"The inference is that you should have starved genteelly and with
pride."

"Oh, fiddle-dee-dee!  But look at Mrs. Merriwether.  She's selling
pies to Yankees and that's worse than running a sawmill, and Mrs.
Elsing takes in sewing and keeps boarders, and Fanny paints awful-
looking china things that nobody wants and everybody buys to help
her and--"

"But you miss the point, my pet.  They aren't successful and so
they aren't affronting the hot Southern pride of their men folks.
The men can still say, 'Poor sweet sillies, how hard they try!
Well, I'll let them think they're helping.'  And besides, the
ladies you mentioned don't enjoy having to work.  They let it be
known that they are only doing it until some man comes along to
relieve them of their unwomanly burdens.  And so everybody feels
sorry for them.  But obviously you do like to work and obviously
you aren't going to let any man tend to your business for you, and
so no one can feel sorry for you.  And Atlanta is never going to
forgive you for that.  It's so pleasant to feel sorry for people."

"I wish you'd be serious, sometimes."

"Did you ever hear the Oriental proverb:  'The dogs bark but the
caravan passes on?'  Let them bark, Scarlett.  I fear nothing will
stop your caravan."

"But why should they mind my making a little money?"

"You can't have everything, Scarlett.  You can either make money in
your present unladylike manner and meet cold shoulders everywhere
you go, or you can be poor and genteel and have lots of friends.
You've made your choice."

"I won't be poor," she said swiftly.  "But--it is the right choice,
isn't it?"

"If it's money you want most."

"Yes, I want money more than anything else in the world."

"Then you've made the only choice.  But there's a penalty attached,
as there is to most things you want.  It's loneliness."

That silenced her for a moment.  It was true.  When she stopped to
think about it, she was a little lonely--lonely for feminine
companionship.  During the war years she had had Ellen to visit
when she felt blue.  And since Ellen's death, there had always been
Melanie, though she and Melanie had nothing in common except the
hard work at Tara.  Now there was no one, for Aunt Pitty had no
conception of life beyond her small round of gossip.

"I think--I think," she began hesitantly, "that I've always been
lonely where women were concerned.  It isn't just my working that
makes Atlanta ladies dislike me.  They just don't like me anyway.
No woman ever really liked me, except Mother.  Even my sisters.
I don't know why, but even before the war, even before I married
Charlie, ladies didn't seem to approve of anything I did--"

"You forget Mrs. Wilkes," said Rhett and his eyes gleamed
maliciously.  "She has always approved of you up to the hilt.
I daresay she'd approve of anything you did, short of murder."

Scarlett thought grimly:  "She's even approved of murder," and she
laughed contemptuously.

"Oh, Melly!" she said, and then, ruefully:  "It's certainly not to
my credit that Melly is the only woman who approves of me, for she
hasn't the sense of a guinea hen.  If she had any sense--"  She
stopped in some confusion.

"If she had any sense, she'd realize a few things and she couldn't
approve," Rhett finished.  "Well, you know more about that than I
do, of course."

"Oh, damn your memory and your bad manners!"

"I'll pass over your unjustified rudeness with the silence it
deserves and return to our former subject.  Make up your mind to
this.  If you are different, you are isolated, not only from people
of your own age but from those of your parents' generation and from
your children's generation too.  They'll never understand you and
they'll be shocked no matter what you do.  But your grandparents
would probably be proud of you and say:  'There's a chip off the
old block,' and your grandchildren will sigh enviously and say:
'What an old rip Grandma must have been!' and they'll try to be
like you."

Scarlett laughed with amusement.

"Sometimes you do hit on the truth!  Now there was my Grandma
Robillard.  Mammy used to hold her over my head whenever I was
naughty.  Grandma was as cold as an icicle and strict about her
manners and everybody else's manners, but she married three times
and had any number of duels fought over her and she wore rouge and
the most shockingly low-cut dresses and no--well, er--not much
under her dresses."

"And you admired her tremendously, for all that you tried to be
like your mother!  I had a grandfather on the Butler side who was a
pirate."

"Not really!  A walk-the-plank kind?"

"I daresay he made people walk the plank if there was any money to
be made that way.  At any rate, he made enough money to leave my
father quite wealthy.  But the family always referred to him
carefully as a 'sea captain.'  He was killed in a saloon brawl long
before I was born.  His death was, needless to say, a great relief
to his children, for the old gentleman was drunk most of the time
and when in his cups was apt to forget that he was a retired sea
captain and give reminiscences that curled his children's hair.
However, I admired him and tried to copy him far more than I ever
did my father, for Father is an amiable gentleman full of honorable
habits and pious saws--so you see how it goes.  I'm sure your
children won't approve of you, Scarlett, any more than Mrs.
Merriwether and Mrs. Elsing and their broods approve of you now.
Your children will probably be soft, prissy creatures, as the
children of hard-bitten characters usually are.  And to make them
worse, you, like every other mother, are probably determined that
they shall never know the hardships you've known.  And that's all
wrong.  Hardships make or break people.  So you'll have to wait for
approval from your grandchildren."

"I wonder what our grandchildren will be like!"

"Are you suggesting by that 'our' that you and I will have mutual
grandchildren?  Fie, Mrs. Kennedy!"

Scarlett, suddenly conscious of her error of speech, went red.  It
was more than his joking words that shamed her, for she was
suddenly aware again of her thickening body.  In no way had either
of them ever hinted at her condition and she had always kept the
lap robe high under her armpits when with him, even on warm days,
comforting herself in the usual feminine manner with the belief
that she did not show at all when thus covered, and she was
suddenly sick with quick rage at her own condition and shame that
he should know.

"You get out of this buggy, you dirty-minded varmit," she said, her
voice shaking.

"I'll do nothing of the kind," he returned calmly.  "It'll be dark
before you get home and there's a new colony of darkies living in
tents and shanties near the next spring, mean niggers I've been
told, and I see no reason why you should give the impulsive Ku Klux
a cause for putting on their nightshirts and riding abroad this
evening."

"Get out!" she cried, tugging at the reins and suddenly nausea
overwhelmed her.  He stopped the horse quickly, passed her two
clean handkerchiefs and held her head over the side of the buggy
with some skill.  The afternoon sun, slanting low through the newly
leaved trees, spun sickeningly for a few moments in a swirl of gold
and green.  When the spell had passed, she put her head in her
hands and cried from sheer mortification.  Not only had she vomited
before a man--in itself as horrible a contretemps as could overtake
a woman--but by doing so, the humiliating fact of her pregnancy
must now be evident.  She felt that she could never look him in the
face again.  To have this happen with him, of all people, with
Rhett who had no respect for women!  She cried, expecting some
coarse and jocular remark from him which she would never be able to
forget.

"Don't be a fool," he said quietly.  "And you are a fool, if you
are crying for shame.  Come, Scarlett, don't be a child.  Surely
you must know that, not being blind, I knew you were pregnant."

She said "Oh" in a stunned voice and tightened her fingers over her
crimson face.  The word itself horrified her.  Frank always
referred to her pregnancy embarrassedly as "your condition," Gerald
had been wont to say delicately "in the family way," when he had to
mention such matters, and ladies genteelly referred to pregnancy as
being "in a fix."

"You are a child if you thought I didn't know, for all your
smothering yourself under that hot lap robe.  Of course, I knew.
Why else do you think I've been--"

He stopped suddenly and a silence fell between them.  He picked up
the reins and clucked to the horse.  He went on talking quietly and
as his drawl fell pleasantly on her ears, some of the color faded
from her down-tucked face.

"I didn't think you could be so shocked, Scarlett.  I thought you
were a sensible person and I'm disappointed.  Can it be possible
that modesty still lingers in your breast?  I'm afraid I'm not a
gentleman to have mentioned the matter.  And I know I'm not a
gentleman, in view of the fact that pregnant women do not embarrass
me as they should.  I find it possible to treat them as normal
creatures and not look at the ground or the sky or anywhere else in
the universe except their waist lines--and then cast at them those
furtive glances I've always thought the height of indecency.  Why
should I?  It's a perfectly normal state.  The Europeans are far
more sensible than we are.  They compliment expectant mothers upon
their expectations.  While I wouldn't advise going that far, still
it's more sensible than our way of trying to ignore it.  It's a
normal state and women should be proud of it, instead of hiding
behind closed doors as if they'd committed a crime."

"Proud!" she cried in a strangled voice.  "Proud--ugh!"

"Aren't you proud to be having a child?"

"Oh dear God, no!  I--I hate babies!"

"You mean--Frank's baby."

"No--anybody's baby."

For a moment she went sick again at this new error of speech, but
his voice went on as easily as though he had not marked it.

"Then we're different.  I like babies."

"You like them?" she cried, looking up, so startled at the
statement that she forgot her embarrassment.  "What a liar you
are!"

"I like babies and I like little children, till they begin to grow
up and acquire adult habits of thought and adult abilities to lie
and cheat and be dirty.  That can't be news to you.  You know I
like Wade Hampton a lot, for all that he isn't the boy he ought to
be."

That was true, thought Scarlett, suddenly marveling.  He did seem
to enjoy playing with Wade and often brought him presents.

"Now that we've brought this dreadful subject into the light and
you admit that you expect a baby some time in the not too distant
future, I'll say something I've been wanting to say for weeks--two
things.  The first is that it's dangerous for you to drive alone.
You know it.  You've been told it often enough.  If you don't care
personally whether or not you are raped, you might consider the
consequences.  Because of your obstinacy, you may get yourself into
a situation where your gallant fellow townsmen will be forced to
avenge you by stringing up a few darkies.  And that will bring the
Yankees down on them and someone will probably get hanged.  Has it
ever occurred to you that perhaps one of the reasons the ladies do
not like you is that your conduct may cause the neck-stretching of
their sons and husbands?  And furthermore, if the Ku Klux handles
many more negroes, the Yankees are going to tighten up on Atlanta
in a way that will make Sherman's conduct look angelic.  I know
what I'm talking about, for I'm hand in glove with the Yankees.
Shameful to state, they treat me as one of them and I hear them
talk openly.  They mean to stamp out the Ku Klux if it means
burning the whole town again and hanging every male over ten.  That
would hurt you, Scarlett.  You might lose money.  And there's no
telling where a prairie fire will stop, once it gets started.
Confiscation of property, higher taxes, fines for suspected women--
I've heard them all suggested.  The Ku Klux--"

"Do you know any Ku Klux?  Is Tommy Wellburn or Hugh or--"

He shrugged impatiently.

"How should I know?  I'm a renegade, a turncoat, a Scallawag.
Would I be likely to know?  But I do know men who are suspected by
the Yankees and one false move from them and they are as good as
hanged.  While I know you would have no regrets at getting your
neighbors on the gallows, I do believe you'd regret losing your
mills.  I see by the stubborn look on your face that you do not
believe me and my words are falling on stony ground.  So all I can
say is, keep that pistol of yours handy--and when I'm in town, I'll
try to be on hand to drive you."

"Rhett, do you really--is it to protect me that you--"

"Yes, my dear, it is my much advertised chivalry that makes me
protect you."  The mocking light began to dance in his black eyes
and all signs of earnestness fled from his face.  "And why?
Because of my deep love for you, Mrs. Kennedy.  Yes, I have
silently hungered and thirsted for you and worshipped you from
afar; but being an honorable man, like Mr. Ashley Wilkes, I have
concealed it from you.  You are, alas, Frank's wife and honor has
forbidden my telling this to you.  But even as Mr. Wilkes' honor
cracks occasionally, so mine is cracking now and I reveal my secret
passion and my--"

"Oh, for God's sake, hush!" interrupted Scarlett, annoyed as usual
when he made her look like a conceited fool, and not caring to have
Ashley and his honor become the subject of further conversation.
"What was the other thing you wanted to tell me?"

"What!  You change the subject when I am baring a loving but
lacerated heart?  Well, the other thing is this."  The mocking
light died out of his eyes again and his face was dark and quiet.

"I want you to do something about this horse.  He's stubborn and
he's got a mouth as tough as iron.  Tires you to drive him, doesn't
it?  Well, if he chose to bolt, you couldn't possibly stop him.
And if you turned over in a ditch, it might kill your baby and you
too.  You ought to get the heaviest curb bit you can, or else let
me swap him for a gentle horse with a more sensitive mouth."

She looked up into his blank, smooth face and suddenly her
irritation fell away, even as her embarrassment had disappeared
after the conversation about her pregnancy.  He had been kind, a
few moments before, to put her at her ease when she was wishing
that she were dead.  And he was being kinder now and very
thoughtful about the horse.  She felt a rush of gratitude to him
and she wondered why he could not always be this way.

"The horse is hard to drive," she agreed meekly.  "Sometimes my
arms ache all night from tugging at him.  You do what you think
best about him, Rhett."

His eyes sparkled wickedly.

"That sounds very sweet and feminine, Mrs. Kennedy.  Not in your
usual masterful vein at all.  Well, it only takes proper handling
to make a clinging vine out of you."

She scowled and her temper came back.

"You will get out of this buggy this time, or I will hit you with
the whip.  I don't know why I put up with you--why I try to be nice
to you.  You have no manners.  You have no morals.  You are nothing
but a--  Well, get out.  I mean it."

But when he had climbed down and untied his horse from the back of
the buggy and stood in the twilight road, grinning tantalizingly at
her, she could not smother her own grin as she drove off.

Yes, he was coarse, he was tricky, he was unsafe to have dealings
with, and you never could tell when the dull weapon you put into
his hands in an unguarded moment might turn into the keenest of
blades.  But, after all, he was as stimulating as--well, as a
surreptitious glass of brandy!

During these months Scarlett had learned the use of brandy.  When
she came home in the late afternoons, damp from the rain, cramped
and aching from long hours in the buggy, nothing sustained her
except the thought of the bottle hidden in her top bureau drawer,
locked against Mammy's prying eyes.  Dr. Meade had not thought to
warn her that a woman in her condition should not drink, for it
never occurred to him that a decent woman would drink anything
stronger than scuppernong wine.  Except, of course, a glass of
champagne at a wedding or a hot toddy when confined to bed with a
hard cold.  Of course, there were unfortunate women who drank, to
the eternal disgrace of their families, just as there were women
who were insane or divorced or who believed, with Miss Susan B.
Anthony, that women should have the vote.  But as much as the
doctor disapproved of Scarlett, he never suspected her of drinking.

Scarlett had found that a drink of neat brandy before supper helped
immeasurably and she would always chew coffee or gargle cologne to
disguise the smell.  Why were people so silly about women drinking,
when men could and did get reeling drunk whenever they wanted to?
Sometimes when Frank lay snoring beside her and sleep would not
come, when she lay tossing, torn with fears of poverty, dreading
the Yankees, homesick for Tara and yearning for Ashley, she thought
she would go crazy were it not for the brandy bottle.  And when the
pleasant familiar warmth stole through her veins, her troubles
began to fade.  After three drinks, she could always say to
herself:  "I'll think of these things tomorrow when I can stand
them better."

But there were some nights when even brandy would not still the
ache in her heart, the ache that was even stronger than fear of
losing the mills, the ache to see Tara again.  Atlanta, with its
noises, its new buildings, its strange faces, its narrow streets
crowded with horses and wagons and bustling crowds sometimes seemed
to stifle her.  She loved Atlanta but--oh, for the sweet peace and
country quiet of Tara, the red fields and the dark pines about it!
Oh, to be back at Tara, no matter how hard the life might be!  And
to be near Ashley, just to see him, to hear him speak, to be
sustained by the knowledge of his love!  Each letter from Melanie,
saying that they were well, each brief note from Will reporting
about the plowing, the planting, the growing of the cotton made her
long anew to be home again.

I'll go home in June.  I can't do anything here after that.  I'll
go home for a couple of months, she thought, and her heart would
rise.  She did go home in June but not as she longed to go, for
early in that month came a brief message from Will that Gerald was
dead.



CHAPTER XXXIX


The train was very late and the long, deeply blue twilight of June
was settling over the countryside when Scarlett alighted in
Jonesboro.  Yellow gleams of lamplight showed in the stores and
houses which remained in the village, but they were few.  Here and
there were wide gaps between the buildings on the main street where
dwellings had been shelled or burned.  Ruined houses with shell
holes in their roofs and half the walls torn away stared at her,
silent and dark.  A few saddle horses and mule teams were hitched
outside the wooden awning of Bullard's store.  The dusty red road
was empty and lifeless, and the only sounds in the village were a
few whoops and drunken laughs that floated on the still twilight
air from a saloon far down the street.

The depot had not been rebuilt since it was burned in the battle
and in its place was only a wooden shelter, with no sides to keep
out the weather.  Scarlett walked under it and sat down on one of
the empty kegs that were evidently put there for seats.  She peered
up and down the street for Will Benteen.  Will should have been
here to meet her.  He should have known she would take the first
train possible after receiving his laconic message that Gerald was
dead.

She had come so hurriedly that she had in her small carpetbag only
a nightgown and a tooth brush, not even a change of underwear.  She
was uncomfortable in the tight black dress she had borrowed from
Mrs. Meade, for she had had no time to get mourning clothes for
herself.  Mrs. Meade was thin now, and Scarlett's pregnancy being
advanced, the dress was doubly uncomfortable.  Even in her sorrow
at Gerald's death, she did not forget the appearance she was making
and she looked down at her body with distaste.  Her figure was
completely gone and her face and ankles were puffy.  Heretofore she
had not cared very much how she looked but now that she would see
Ashley within the hour she cared greatly.  Even in her heartbreak,
she shrank from the thought of facing him when she was carrying
another man's child.  She loved him and he loved her, and this
unwanted child now seemed to her a proof of infidelity to that
love.  But much as she disliked having him see her with the
slenderness gone from her waist and the lightness from her step, it
was something she could not escape now.

She patted her foot impatiently.  Will should have met her.  Of
course, she could go over to Bullard's and inquire after him or ask
someone there to drive her over to Tara, should she find he had
been unable to come.  But she did not want to go to Bullard's.  It
was Saturday night and probably half the men of the County would be
there.  She did not want to display her condition in this poorly
fitting black dress which accentuated rather than hid her figure.
And she did not want to hear the kindly sympathy that would be
poured out about Gerald.  She did not want sympathy.  She was
afraid she would cry if anyone even mentioned his name to her.  And
she wouldn't cry.  She knew if she once began it would be like the
time she cried into the horse's mane, that dreadful night when
Atlanta fell and Rhett had left her on the dark road outside the
town, terrible tears that tore her heart and could not be stopped.

No, she wouldn't cry!  She felt the lump in her throat rising
again, as it had done so often since the news came, but crying
wouldn't do any good.  It would only confuse and weaken her.  Why,
oh, why hadn't Will or Melanie or the girls written her that Gerald
was ailing?  She would have taken the first train to Tara to care
for him, brought a doctor from Atlanta if necessary.  The fools--
all of them!  Couldn't they manage anything without her?  She
couldn't be in two places at once and the good Lord knew she was
doing her best for them all in Atlanta.

She twisted about on the keg, becoming nervous and fidgety as Will
still did not come.  Where was he?  Then she heard the scrunching
of cinders on the railroad tracks behind her and, twisting her
body, she saw Alex Fontaine crossing the tracks toward a wagon, a
sack of oats on his shoulder.

"Good Lord!  Isn't that you, Scarlett?" he cried, dropping the sack
and running to take her hand, pleasure written all over his bitter,
swarthy little face.  "I'm so glad to see you.  I saw Will over at
the blacksmith's shop, getting the horse shod.  The train was late
and he thought he'd have time.  Shall I run fetch him?"

"Yes, please, Alex," she said, smiling in spite of her sorrow.  It
was good to see a County face again.

"Oh--er--Scarlett," he began awkwardly, still holding her hand,
"I'm mighty sorry about your father."

"Thank you," she replied, wishing he had not said it.  His words
brought up Gerald's florid face and bellowing voice so clearly.

"If it's any comfort to you, Scarlett, we're mighty proud of him
around here," Alex continued, dropping her hand.  "He--well, we
figure he died like a soldier and in a soldier's cause."

Now what did he mean by that, she thought confusedly.  A soldier?
Had someone shot him?  Had he gotten into a fight with the
Scallawags as Tony had?  But she mustn't hear more.  She would cry
if she talked about him and she mustn't cry, not until she was
safely in the wagon with Will and out in the country where no
stranger could see her.  Will wouldn't matter.  He was just like a
brother.

"Alex, I don't want to talk about it," she said shortly.

"I don't blame you one bit, Scarlett," said Alex while the dark
blood of anger flooded his face.  "If it was my sister, I'd--well,
Scarlett, I've never yet said a harsh word about any woman, but
personally I think somebody ought to take a rawhide whip to
Suellen."

What foolishness was he talking about now, she wondered.  What had
Suellen to do with it all?

"Everybody around here feels the same way about her, I'm sorry to
say.  Will's the only one who takes up for her--and, of course,
Miss Melanie, but she's a saint and won't see bad in anyone and--"

"I said I didn't want to talk about it," she said coldly but Alex
did not seem rebuffed.  He looked as though he understood her
rudeness and that was annoying.  She didn't want to hear bad
tidings about her own family from an outsider, didn't want him to
know of her ignorance of what had happened.  Why hadn't Will sent
her the full details?

She wished Alex wouldn't look at her so hard.  She felt that he
realized her condition and it embarrassed her.  But what Alex was
thinking as he peered at her in the twilight was that her face had
changed so completely he wondered how he had ever recognized her.
Perhaps it was because she was going to have a baby.  Women did
look like the devil at such times.  And, of course, she must be
feeling badly about old man O'Hara.  She had been his pet.  But,
no, the change was deeper than that.  She really looked as if she
had three square meals a day.  And the hunted-animal look had
partly gone from her eyes.  Now, the eyes which had been fearful
and desperate were hard.  There was an air of command, assurance
and determination about her, even when she smiled.  Bet she led old
Frank a merry life!  Yes, she had changed.  She was a handsome
woman, to be sure, but all that pretty, sweet softness had gone
from her face and that flattering way of looking up at a man, like
he knew more than God Almighty, had utterly vanished.

Well, hadn't they all changed?  Alex looked down at his rough
clothes and his face fell into its usual bitter lines.  Sometimes
at night when he lay awake, wondering how his mother was going to
get that operation and how poor dead Joe's little boy was going to
get an education and how he was going to get money for another
mule, he wished the war was still going on, wished it had gone on
forever.  They didn't know their luck then.  There was always
something to eat in the army, even if it was just corn bread,
always somebody to give orders and none of this torturing sense of
facing problems that couldn't be solved--nothing to bother about in
the army except getting killed.  And then there was Dimity Munroe.
Alex wanted to marry her and he knew he couldn't when so many were
already looking to him for support.  He had loved her for so long
and now the roses were fading from her cheeks and the joy from her
eyes.  If only Tony hadn't had to run away to Texas.  Another man
on the place would make all the difference in the world.  His
lovable bad-tempered little brother, penniless somewhere in the
West.  Yes, they had all changed.  And why not?  He sighed heavily.

"I haven't thanked you for what you and Frank did for Tony," he
said.  "It was you who helped him get away, wasn't it?  It was fine
of you.  I heard in a roundabout way that he was safe in Texas.  I
was afraid to write and ask you--but did you or Frank lend him any
money?  I want to repay--"

"Oh, Alex, please hush!  Not now!" cried Scarlett.  For once, money
meant nothing to her.

Alex was silent for a moment.

"I'll get Will for you," he said, "and we'll all be over tomorrow
for the funeral."

As he picked up the sack of oats and turned away, a wobbly-wheeled
wagon swayed out of a side street and creaked up to them.  Will
called from the seat:  "I'm sorry I'm late, Scarlett."

Climbing awkwardly down from the wagon, he stumped toward her and,
bending, kissed her cheek.  Will had never kissed her before, had
never failed to precede her name with "Miss" and, while it
surprised her, it warmed her heart and pleased her very much.  He
lifted her carefully over the wheel and into the wagon and, looking
down, she saw that it was the same old rickety wagon in which she
had fled from Atlanta.  How had it ever held together so long?
Will must have kept it patched up very well.  It made her slightly
sick to look at it and to remember that night.  If it took the
shoes off her feet or food from Aunt Pitty's table, she'd see that
there was a new wagon at Tara and this one burned.

Will did not speak at first and Scarlett was grateful.  He threw
his battered straw hat into the back of the wagon, clucked to the
horse and they moved off.  Will was just the same, lank and
gangling, pink of hair, mild of eye, patient as a draft animal.

They left the village behind and turned into the red road to Tara.
A faint pink still lingered about the edges of the sky and fat
feathery clouds were tinged with gold and palest green.  The
stillness of the country twilight came down about them as calming
as a prayer.  How had she ever borne it, she thought, away for all
these months, away from the fresh smell of country air, the plowed
earth and the sweetness of summer nights?  The moist red earth
smelled so good, so familiar, so friendly, she wanted to get out
and scoop up a handful.  The honeysuckle which draped the gullied
red sides of the road in tangled greenery was piercingly fragrant
as always after rain, the sweetest perfume in the world.  Above
their heads a flock of chimney swallows whirled suddenly on swift
wings and now and then a rabbit scurried startled across the road,
his white tail bobbing like an eiderdown powder puff.  She saw with
pleasure that the cotton stood well, as they passed between plowed
fields where the green bushes reared themselves sturdily out of the
red earth.  How beautiful all this was!  The soft gray mist in the
swampy bottoms, the red earth and growing cotton, the sloping
fields with curving green rows and the black pines rising behind
everything like sable walls.  How had she ever stayed in Atlanta so
long?

"Scarlett, before I tell you about Mr. O'Hara--and I want to tell
you everything before you get home--I want to ask your opinion on a
matter. I figger you're the head of the house now."

"What is it, Will?"

He turned his mild sober gaze on her for a moment.

"I just wanted your approval to my marryin' Suellen."

Scarlett clutched the seat, so surprised that she almost fell
backwards.  Marry Suellen!  She'd never thought of anybody marrying
Suellen since she had taken Frank Kennedy from her.  Who would have
Suellen?

"Goodness, Will!"

"Then I take it you don't mind?"

"Mind?  No, but--  Why, Will, you've taken my breath away!  You
marry Suellen?  Will, I always thought you were sweet on Carreen."

Will kept his eyes on the horse and flapped the reins.  His profile
did not change but she thought he sighed slightly.

"Maybe I was," he said.

"Well, won't she have you?"

"I never asked her."

"Oh, Will, you're a fool.  Ask her.  She's worth two of Suellen!"

"Scarlett, you don't know a lot of things that's been going on at
Tara.  You ain't favored us with much of your attention these last
months."

"I haven't, haven't I?" she flared.  "What do you suppose I've been
doing in Atlanta?  Riding around in a coach and four and going to
balls?  Haven't I sent you money every month?  Haven't I paid the
taxes and fixed the roof and bought the new plow and the mules?
Haven't--"

"Now, don't fly off the handle and get your Irish up," he
interrupted imperturbably.  "If anybody knows what you've done, I
do, and it's been two men's work."

Slightly mollified, she questioned, "Well then, what do you mean?"

"Well, you've kept the roof over us and food in the pantry and I
ain't denyin' that, but you ain't given much thought to what's been
goin' on in anybody's head here at Tara.  I ain't blamin' you,
Scarlett.  That's just your way.  You warn't never very much
interested in what was in folks' heads.  But what I'm tryin' to
tell you is that I didn't never ask Miss Carreen because I knew it
wouldn't be no use.  She's been like a little sister to me and I
guess she talks to me plainer than to anybody in the world.  But
she never got over that dead boy and she never will.  And I might
as well tell you now she's aimin' to go in a convent over to
Charleston."

"Are you joking?"

"Well, I knew it would take you back and I just want to ask you,
Scarlett, don't you argue with her about it or scold her or laugh
at her.  Let her go.  It's all she wants now.  Her heart's broken."

"But God's nightgown!  Lots of people's hearts have been broken and
they didn't run off to convents.  Look at me.  I lost a husband."

"But your heart warn't broken," Will said calmly and, picking up a
straw from the bottom of the wagon, he put it in his mouth and
chewed slowly.  That remark took the wind out of her.  As always
when she heard the truth spoken, no matter how unpalatable it was,
basic honesty forced her to acknowledge it as truth.  She was
silent a moment, trying to accustom herself to the idea of Carreen
as a nun.

"Promise you won't fuss at her."

"Oh, well, I promise," and then she looked at him with a new
understanding and some amazement.  Will had loved Carreen, loved
her now enough to take her part and make her retreat easy.  And yet
he wanted to marry Suellen.

"Well, what's all this about Suellen?  You don't care for her, do
you?"

"Oh, yes, I do in a way," he said removing the straw and surveying
it as if it were highly interesting.  "Suellen ain't as bad as you
think, Scarlett.  I think we'll get along right well.  The only
trouble with Suellen is that she needs a husband and some children
and that's just what every woman needs."

The wagon jolted over the rutty road and for a few minutes while
the two sat silent Scarlett's mind was busy.  There must be
something more to it than appeared on the surface, something
deeper, more important, to make the mild and soft-spoken Will want
to marry a complaining nagger like Suellen.

"You haven't told me the real reason, Will.  If I'm head of the
family, I've got a right to know."

"That's right," said Will, "and I guess you'll understand.  I can't
leave Tara.  It's home to me, Scarlett, the only real home I ever
knew and I love every stone of it.  I've worked on it like it was
mine.  And when you put out work on somethin', you come to love it.
You know what I mean?"

She knew what he meant and her heart went out in a surge of warm
affection for him, hearing him say he, too, loved the thing she
loved best.

"And I figger it this way.  With your pa gone and Carreen a nun,
there'll be just me and Suellen left here and, of course, I
couldn't live on at Tara without marryin' Suellen.  You know how
folks talk."

"But--but Will, there's Melanie and Ashley--"

At Ashley's name he turned and looked at her, his pale eyes
unfathomable.  She had the old feeling that Will knew all about her
and Ashley, understood all and did not either censure or approve.

"They'll be goin' soon."

"Going?  Where?  Tara is their home as well as yours."

"No, it ain't their home.  That's just what's eatin' on Ashley.  It
ain't his home and he don't feel like he's earnin' his keep.  He's
a mighty pore farmer and he knows it.  God knows he tries his best
but he warn't cut out for farmin' and you know it as well as I do.
If he splits kindlin', like as not he'll slice off his foot.  He
can't no more keep a plow straight in a furrow than little Beau
can, and what he don't know about makin' things grow would fill a
book.  It ain't his fault.  He just warn't bred for it.  And it
worries him that he's a man livin' at Tara on a woman's charity and
not givin' much in return."

"Charity?  Has he ever said--"

"No, he's never said a word.  You know Ashley.  But I can tell.
Last night when we were sittin' up with your pa, I tole him I had
asked Suellen and she'd said Yes.  And then Ashley said that
relieved him because he'd been feelin' like a dog, stayin' on at
Tara, and he knew he and Miss Melly would have to keep stayin' on,
now that Mr. O'Hara was dead, just to keep folks from talkin' about
me and Suellen.  So then he told me he was aimin' to leave Tara and
get work."

"Work?  What kind?  Where?"

"I don't know exactly what he'll do but he said he was goin' up
North.  He's got a Yankee friend in New York who wrote him about
workin' in a bank up there."

"Oh, no!" cried Scarlett from the bottom of her heart and, at the
cry, Will gave her the same look as before.

"Maybe 'twould be better all 'round if he did go North."

"No!  No!  I don't think so."

Her mind was working feverishly.  Ashley couldn't go North!  She
might never see him again.  Even though she had not seen him in
months, had not spoken to him alone since that fateful scene in the
orchard, there had not been a day when she had not thought of him,
been glad he was sheltered under her roof.  She had never sent a
dollar to Will that she had not been pleased that it would make
Ashley's life easier.  Of course, he wasn't any good as a farmer.
Ashley was bred for better things, she thought proudly.  He was
born to rule, to live in a large house, ride fine horses, read
books of poetry and tell negroes what to do.  That there were no
more mansions and horses and negroes and few books did not alter
matters.  Ashley wasn't bred to plow and split rails.  No wonder he
wanted to leave Tara.

But she could not let him go away from Georgia.  If necessary, she
would bully Frank into giving him a job in the store, make Frank
turn off the boy he now had behind the counter.  But, no--Ashley's
place was no more behind a counter than it was behind a plow.  A
Wilkes a shopkeeper!  Oh, never that!  There must be something--
why, her mill of course!  Her relief at the thought was so great
that she smiled.  But would he accept an offer from her?  Would he
still think it was charity?  She must manage it so he would think
he was doing her a favor.  She would discharge Mr. Johnson and put
Ashley in charge of the old mill while Hugh operated the new one.
She would explain to Ashley how Frank's ill health and the pressure
of work at the store kept him from helping her, and she would plead
her condition as another reason why she needed his help.

She would make him realize somehow that she couldn't do without his
aid at this time.  And she would give him a half-interest in the
mill, if he would only take it over--anything just to have him near
her, anything to see that bright smile light up his face, anything
for the chance of catching an unguarded look in his eyes that
showed he still cared.  But, she promised herself, never, never
would she again try to prod him into words of love, never again
would she try to make him throw away that foolish honor he valued
more than love.  Somehow, she must delicately convey to him this
new resolution of hers.  Otherwise he might refuse, fearing another
scene such as that last terrible one had been.

"I can get him something to do in Atlanta," she said.

"Well, that's yours and Ashley's business," said Will and put the
straw back in his mouth.  "Giddap, Sherman.  Now, Scarlett.
there's somethin' else I've got to ask you before I tell you about
your pa.  I won't have you lightin' into Suellen.  What she's done,
she's done, and you snatchin' her baldheaded won't bring Mr. O'Hara
back.  Besides she honestly thought she was actin' for the best!"

"I wanted to ask you about that.  What is all this about Suellen?
Alex talked riddles and said she ought to be whipped.  What has she
done?"

"Yes, folks are pretty riled up about her.  Everybody I run into
this afternoon in Jonesboro was promisin' to cut her dead the next
time they seen her, but maybe they'll get over it.  Now, promise me
you won't light into her.  I won't be havin' no quarrelin' tonight
with Mr. O'Hara layin' dead in the parlor."

HE won't be having any quarreling! thought Scarlett, indignantly.
He talks like Tara was his already!

And then she thought of Gerald, dead in the parlor, and suddenly
she began to cry, cry in bitter, gulping sobs.  Will put his arm
around her, drew her comfortably close and said nothing.

As they jolted slowly down the darkening road, her head on his
shoulder, her bonnet askew, she had forgotten the Gerald of the
last two years, the vague old gentleman who stared at doors waiting
for a woman who would never enter.  She was remembering the vital,
virile old man with his mane of crisp white hair, his bellowing
cheerfulness, his stamping boots, his clumsy jokes, his generosity.
She remembered how, as a child, he had seemed the most wonderful
man in the world, this blustering father who carried her before him
on his saddle when he jumped fences, turned her up and paddled her
when she was naughty, and then cried when she cried and gave her
quarters to get her to hush.  She remembered him coming home from
Charleston and Atlanta laden with gifts that were never appropriate,
remembered too, with a faint smile through tears, how he came home
in the wee hours from Court Day at Jonesboro, drunk as seven earls,
jumping fences, his rollicking voice raised in "The Wearin' o' the
Green."  And how abashed he was, facing Ellen on the morning after.
Well, he was with Ellen now.

"Why didn't you write me that he was ill?  I'd have come so fast--"

"He warn't ill, not a minute.  Here, honey, take my handkerchief
and I'll tell you all about it."

She blew her nose on his bandanna, for she had come from Atlanta
without even a handkerchief, and settled back into the crook of
Will's arm.  How nice Will was.  Nothing ever upset him.

"Well, it was this way, Scarlett.  You been sendin' us money right
along and Ashley and me, well, we've paid taxes and bought the mule
and seeds and what-all and a few hogs and chickens.  Miss Melly's
done mighty well with the hens, yes sir, she has.  She's a fine
woman, Miss Melly is.  Well, anyway, after we bought things for
Tara, there warn't so much left over for folderols, but none of us
warn't complainin'.  Except Suellen.

"Miss Melanie and Miss Carreen stay at home and wear their old
clothes like they're proud of them but you know Suellen, Scarlett.
She hasn't never got used to doin' without.  It used to stick in
her craw that she had to wear old dresses every time I took her
into Jonesboro or over to Fayetteville.  'Specially as some of
those Carpetbaggers' ladi--women was always flouncin' around in
fancy trimmin's.  The wives of those damn Yankees that run the
Freedmen's Bureau, do they dress up!  Well, it's kind of been a
point of honor with the ladies of the County to wear their worst-
lookin' dresses to town, just to show how they didn't care and was
proud to wear them.  But not Suellen.  And she wanted a horse and
carriage too.  She pointed out that you had one."

"It's not a carriage, it's an old buggy," said Scarlett indignantly.

"Well, no matter what.  I might as well tell you Suellen never has
got over your marryin' Frank Kennedy and I don't know as I blame
her.  You know that was a kind of scurvy trick to play on a
sister."

Scarlett rose from his shoulder, furious as a rattler ready to
strike.

"Scurvy trick, hey?  I'll thank you to keep a civil tongue in your
head, Will Benteen!  Could I help it if he preferred me to her?"

"You're a smart girl, Scarlett, and I figger, yes, you could have
helped him preferrin' you.  Girls always can.  But I guess you kind
of coaxed him.  You're a mighty takin' person when you want to be,
but all the same, he was Suellen's beau.  Why, she'd had a letter
from him a week before you went to Atlanta and he was sweet as
sugar about her and talked about how they'd get married when he got
a little more money ahead.  I know because she showed me the
letter."

Scarlett was silent because she knew he was telling the truth and
she could think of nothing to say.  She had never expected Will, of
all people, to sit in judgment on her.  Moreover the lie she had
told Frank had never weighed heavily upon her conscience.  If a
girl couldn't keep a beau, she deserved to lose him.

"Now, Will, don't be mean," she said.  "If Suellen had married him,
do you think she'd ever have spent a penny on Tara or any of us?"

"I said you could be right takin' when you wanted to," said Will,
turning to her with a quiet grin.  "No, I don't think we'd ever
seen a penny of old Frank's money.  But still there's no gettin'
'round it, it was a scurvy trick and if you want to justify the end
by the means, it's none of my business and who am I to complain?
But just the same Suellen has been like a hornet ever since.  I
don't think she cared much about old Frank but it kind of teched
her vanity and she's been sayin' as how you had good clothes and a
carriage and lived in Atlanta while she was buried here at Tara.
She does love to go callin' and to parties, you know, and wear
pretty clothes.  I ain't blamin' her.  Women are like that.

"Well, about a month ago I took her into Jonesboro and left her to
go callin' while I tended to business and when I took her home, she
was still as a mouse but I could see she was so excited she was
ready to bust.  I thought she'd found out somebody was goin' to
have a--that she'd heard some gossip that was interestin', and I
didn't pay her much mind.  She went around home for about a week
all swelled up and excited and didn't have much to say.  She went
over to see Miss Cathleen Calvert--Scarlett, you'd cry your eyes
out at Miss Cathleen.  Pore girl, she'd better be dead than married
to that pusillanimous Yankee Hilton.  You knew he'd mortgaged the
place and lost it and they're goin' to have to leave?"

"No, I didn't know and I don't want to know.  I want to know about
Pa."

"Well, I'm gettin' to that," said Will patiently.  "When she come
back from over there she said we'd all misjudged Hilton.  She
called him Mr. Hilton and she said he was a smart man, but we just
laughed at her.  Then she took to takin' your pa out to walk in the
afternoons and lots of times when I was comin' home from the field
I'd see her sittin' with him on the wall 'round the buryin' ground,
talkin' at him hard and wavin' her hands.  And the old gentleman
would just look at her sort of puzzled-like and shake his head.
You know how he's been, Scarlett.  He just got kind of vaguer and
vaguer, like he didn't hardly know where he was or who we were.
One time, I seen her point to your ma's grave and the old gentleman
begun to cry.  And when she come in the house all happy and excited
lookin', I gave her a talkin' to, right sharp, too, and I said:
'Miss Suellen, why in hell are you devilin' your poor pa and
bringin' up your ma to him?  Most of the time he don't realize
she's dead and here you are rubbin' it in.'  And she just kind of
tossed her head and laughed and said:  'Mind your business.  Some
day you'll be glad of what I'm doin'.'  Miss Melanie told me last
night that Suellen had told her about her schemes but Miss Melly
said she didn't have no notion Suellen was serious.  She said she
didn't tell none of us because she was so upset at the very idea."

"What idea?  Are you ever going to get to the point?  We're halfway
home now.  I want to know about Pa."

"I'm trying to tell you," said Will, "and we're so near home, I
guess I'd better stop right here till I've finished."

He drew rein and the horse stopped and snorted.  They had halted by
the wild overgrown mock-orange hedge that marked the MacIntosh
property.  Glancing under the dark trees Scarlett could just
discern the tall ghostly chimneys still rearing above the silent
ruin.  She wished that Will had chosen any other place to stop.

"Well, the long and the short of her idea was to make the Yankees
pay for the cotton they burned and the stock they drove off and the
fences and the barns they tore down."

"The Yankees?"

"Haven't you heard about it?  The Yankee government's been payin'
claims on all destroyed property of Union sympathizers in the
South."

"Of course I've heard about that," said Scarlett.  "But what's that
got to do with us?"

"A heap, in Suellen's opinion.  That day I took her to Jonesboro,
she run into Mrs. MacIntosh and when they were gossipin' along,
Suellen couldn't help noticin' what fine-lookin' clothes Mrs.
MacIntosh had on and she couldn't help askin' about them.  Then
Mrs. MacIntosh gave herself a lot of airs and said as how her
husband had put in a claim with the Federal government for
destroyin' the property of a loyal Union sympathizer who had never
given aid and comfort to the Confederacy in any shape or form."

"They never gave aid and comfort to anybody," snapped Scarlett.
"Scotch-Irish!"

"Well, maybe that's true.  I don't know them.  Anyway, the
government gave them, well--I forget how many thousand dollars.  A
right smart sum it was, though.  That started Suellen.  She thought
about it all week and didn't say nothin' to us because she knew
we'd just laugh.  But she just had to talk to somebody so she went
over to Miss Cathleen's and that damned white trash, Hilton, gave
her a passel of new ideas.  He pointed out that your pa warn't even
born in this country, that he hadn't fought in the war and hadn't
had no sons to fight, and hadn't never held no office under the
Confederacy.  He said they could strain a point about Mr. O'Hara
bein' a loyal Union sympathizer.  He filled her up with such truck
and she come home and begun workin' on Mr. O'Hara.  Scarlett, I bet
my life your pa didn't even know half the time what she was talkin'
about.  That was what she was countin' on, that he would take the
Iron Clad oath and not even know it."

"Pa take the Iron Clad oath!" cried Scarlett.

"Well, he'd gotten right feeble in his mind these last months and I
guess she was countin' on that.  Mind you, none of us suspicioned
nothin' about it.  We knew she was cookin' up somethin', but we
didn't know she was usin' your dead ma to reproach him for his
daughters bein' in rags when he could get a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars out of the Yankees."

"One hundred and fifty thousand dollars," murmured Scarlett, her
horror at the oath fading.

What a lot of money that was!  And to be had for the mere signing
of an oath of allegiance to the United States government, an oath
stating that the signer had always supported the government and
never given aid and comfort to its enemies.  One hundred and fifty
thousand dollars!  That much money for that small a lie!  Well, she
couldn't blame Suellen.  Good heavens!  Was that what Alex meant by
wanting to rawhide her?  What the County meant by intending to cut
her?  Fools, every one of them.  What couldn't she do with that
much money!  What couldn't any of the folks in the County do with
it!  And what did so small a lie matter?  After all, anything you
could get out of the Yankees was fair money, no matter how you got
it.

"Yesterday, about noon when Ashley and me were splittin' rails,
Suellen got this wagon and got your pa in it and off they went to
town without a word to anybody.  Miss Melly had a notion what it
was all about but she was prayin' somethin' would change Suellen,
so she didn't say nothin' to the rest of us.  She just didn't see
how Suellen could do such a thing.

"Today I heard all about what happened.  That pusillanimous fellow,
Hilton, had some influence with the other Scallawags and
Republicans in town and Suellen had agreed to give them some of the
money--I don't know how much--if they'd kind of wink their eye
about Mr. O'Hara bein' a loyal Union man and play on how he was an
Irishman and didn't fight in the army and so on, and sign
recommendations.  All your pa had to do was take the oath and sign
the paper and off it would go to Washington.

"They rattled off the oath real fast and he didn't say nothin' and
it went right well till she got him up to the signin' of it.  And
then the old gentleman kind of come to himself for a minute and
shook his head.  I don't think he knew what it was all about but he
didn't like it and Suellen always did rub him the wrong way.  Well,
that just about gave her the nervous fits after all the trouble
she'd gone to.  She took him out of the office and rode him up and
down the road and talked to him about your ma cryin' out of her
grave at him for lettin' her children suffer when he could provide
for them.  They tell me your pa sat there in the wagon and cried
like a baby, like he always does when he hears her name.  Everybody
in town saw them and Alex Fontaine went over to see what was the
matter, but Suellen gave him the rough side of her tongue and told
him to mind his own business, so he went off mad.

"I don't know where she got the notion but some time in the
afternoon she got a bottle of brandy and took Mr. O'Hara back to
the office and begun pourin' it for him.  Scarlett, we haven't had
no spirits 'round Tara for a year, just a little blackberry wine
and scuppernong wine Dilcey makes, and Mr. O'Hara warn't used to
it.  He got real drunk, and after Suellen had argued and nagged a
couple of hours he gave in and said Yes, he'd sign anything she
wanted.  They got the oath out again and just as he was about to
put pen to paper, Suellen made her mistake.  She said:  'Well, now.
I guess the Slatterys and the MacIntoshes won't be givin'
themselves airs over us!'  You see, Scarlett, the Slatterys had put
in a claim for a big amount for that little shack of theirs that
the Yankees burned and Emmie's husband had got it through
Washington for them.

"They tell me that when Suellen said those names, your pa kind of
straightened up and squared his shoulders and looked at her, sharp-
like.  He warn't vague no more and he said:  'Have the Slatterys
and the MacIntoshes signed somethin' like this?' and Suellen got
nervous and said Yes and No and stuttered and he shouted right
loud:  'Tell me, did that God-damned Orangeman and that God-damned
poor white sign somethin' like this?'  And that feller Hilton spoke
up smooth-like and said:  'Yes sir, they did and they got a pile of
money like you'll get.'

"And then the old gentleman let out a roar like a bull.  Alex
Fontaine said he heard him from down the street at the saloon.  And
he said with a brogue you could cut with a butterknife:  'And were
ye afther thinkin' an O'Hara of Tara would be follyin' the dirthy
thracks of a Goddamned Orangeman and a God-damned poor white?'  And
he tore the paper in two and threw it in Suellen's face and he
bellowed:  'Ye're no daughter of mine!' and he was out of the
office before you could say Jack Robinson.

"Alex said he saw him come out on the street, chargin' like a bull.
He said the old gentleman looked like his old self for the first
time since your ma died.  Said he was reelin' drunk and cussin' at
the top of his lungs.  Alex said he never heard such fine cussin'.
Alex's horse was standin' there and your pa climbed on it without a
by-your-leave and off he went in a cloud of dust so thick it choked
you, cussin' every breath he drew.

"Well, about sundown Ashley and me were sittin' on the front step,
lookin' down the road and mighty worried.  Miss Melly was upstairs
cryin' on her bed and wouldn't tell us nothin'.  Terrectly, we
heard a poundin' down the road and somebody yellin' like they was
fox huntin' and Ashley said:  'That's queer!  That sounds like Mr.
O'Hara when he used to ride over to see us before the war."

"And then we seen him way down at the end of the pasture.  He must
have jumped the fence right over there.  And he come ridin' hell-
for-leather up the hill, singin' at the top of his voice like he
didn't have a care in the world.  I didn't know your pa had such a
voice.  He was singin' 'Peg in a Low-backed Car' and beatin' the
horse with his hat and the horse was goin' like mad.  He didn't
draw rein when he come near the top and we seen he was goin' to
jump the pasture fence and we hopped up, scared to death, and then
he yelled:  'Look, Ellen!  Watch me take this one!'  But the horse
stopped right on his haunches at the fence and wouldn't take the
jump and your pa went right over his head.  He didn't suffer none.
He was dead time we got to him.  I guess it broke his neck."

Will waited a minute for her to speak and when she did not he
picked up the reins.  "Giddap, Sherman," he said, and the horse
started on toward home.



CHAPTER XL


Scarlett slept little that night.  When the dawn had come and the
sun was creeping over the black pines on the hills to the east, she
rose from her tumbled bed and, seating herself on a stool by the
window, laid her tired head on her arm and looked out over the barn
yard and orchard of Tara toward the cotton fields.  Everything was
fresh and dewy and silent and green and the sight of the cotton
fields brought a measure of balm and comfort to her sore heart.
Tara, at sunrise, looked loved, well tended and at peace, for all
that its master lay dead.  The squatty log chicken house was clay
daubed against rats, weasels and clean with whitewash, and so was
the log stable.  The garden with its rows of corn, bright-yellow
squash, butter beans and turnips was well weeded and neatly fenced
with split-oak rails.  The orchard was cleared of underbrush and
only daisies grew beneath the long rows of trees.  The sun picked
out with faint glistening the apples and the furred pink peaches
half hidden in the green leaves.  Beyond lay the curving rows of
cotton, still and green under the gold of the new sky.  The ducks
and chickens were waddling and strutting off toward the fields, for
under the bushes in the soft plowed earth were found the choicest
worms and slugs.

Scarlett's heart swelled with affection and gratitude to Will who
had done all of this.  Even her loyalty to Ashley could not make
her believe he had been responsible for much of this well-being,
for Tara's bloom was not the work of a planter-aristocrat, but of
the plodding, tireless "small farmer" who loved his land.  It was
a "two-horse" farm, not the lordly plantation of other days with
pastures full of mules and fine horses and cotton and corn
stretching as far as eye could see.  But what there was of it was
good and the acres that were lying fallow could be reclaimed when
times grew better, and they would be the more fertile for their
rest.

Will had done more than merely farm a few acres.  He had kept
sternly at bay those two enemies of Georgia planters, the seedling
pine and the blackberry brambles.  They had not stealthily taken
garden and pasture and cotton field and lawn and reared themselves
insolently by the porches of Tara, as they were doing on numberless
plantations throughout the state.

Scarlett's heart failed a beat when she thought how close Tara had
come to going back to wilderness.  Between herself and Will, they
had done a good job.  They had held off the Yankees, the
Carpetbaggers and the encroachments of Nature.  And, best of all,
Will had told her that after the cotton came in in the fall, she
need send no more money--unless some other Carpetbagger coveted
Tara and skyrocketed the taxes.  Scarlett knew Will would have a
hard pull without her help but she admired and respected his
independence.  As long as he was in the position of hired help he
would take her money, but now that he was to become her brother-in-
law and the man of the house, he intended to stand on his own
efforts.  Yes, Will was something the Lord had provided.



Pork had dug the grave the night before, close by Ellen's grave,
and he stood, spade in hand, behind the moist red clay he was soon
to shovel back in place.  Scarlett stood behind him in the patchy
shade of a gnarled low-limbed cedar, the hot sun of the June
morning dappling her, and tried to keep her eyes away from the red
trench in front of her.  Jim Tarleton, little Hugh Munroe, Alex
Fontaine and old man McRae's youngest grandson came slowly and
awkwardly down the path from the house bearing Gerald's coffin on
two lengths of split oak.  Behind them, at a respectful distance,
followed a large straggling crowd of neighbors and friends,
shabbily dressed, silent.  As they came down the sunny path through
the garden, Pork bowed his head upon the top of the spade handle
and cried; and Scarlett saw with incurious surprise that the kinks
on his head, so jettily black when she went to Atlanta a few months
before, were now grizzled.

She thanked God tiredly that she had cried all her tears the night
before, so now she could stand erect and dry eyed.  The sound of
Suellen's tears, just back of her shoulder, irritated her
unbearably and she had to clench her fists to keep from turning and
slapping the swollen face.  Sue had been the cause of her father's
death, whether she intended it or not, and she should have the
decency to control herself in front of the hostile neighbors.  Not
a single person had spoken to her that morning or given her one
look of sympathy.  They had kissed Scarlett quietly, shaken her
hand, murmured kind words to Carreen and even to Pork but had
looked through Suellen as if she were not there.

To them she had done worse than murder her father.  She had tried
to betray him into disloyalty to the South.  And to that grim and
close-knit community it was as if she had tried to betray the honor
of them all.  She had broken the solid front the County presented
to the world.  By her attempt to get money from the Yankee
government she had aligned herself with Carpetbaggers and
Scallawags, more hated enemies than the Yankee soldiers had ever
been.  She, a member of an old and staunchly Confederate family, a
planter's family, had gone over to the enemy and by so doing had
brought shame on every family in the County.

The mourners were seething with indignation and downcast with
sorrow, especially three of them--old man McRae, who had been
Gerald's crony since he came to the up-country from Savannah so
many years before, Grandma Fontaine who loved him because he was
Ellen's husband, and Mrs. Tarleton who had been closer to him than
to any of her neighbors because, as she often said, he was the only
man in the County who knew a stallion from a gelding.

The sight of the stormy faces of these three in the dim parlor
where Gerald lay before the funeral had caused Ashley and Will some
uneasiness and they had retired to Ellen's office for a consultation.

"Some of them are goin' to say somethin' about Suellen," said Will
abruptly, biting his straw in half.  "They think they got just
cause to say somethin'.  Maybe they have.  It ain't for me to say.
But, Ashley, whether they're right or not, we'll have to resent it,
bein' the men of the family, and then there'll be trouble.  Can't
nobody do nothin' with old man McRae because he's deaf as a post
and can't hear folks tryin' to shut him up.  And you know there
ain't nobody in God's world ever stopped Grandma Fontaine from
speakin' her mind.  And as for Mrs. Tarleton--did you see her roll
them russet eyes of hers every time she looked at Sue?  She's got
her ears laid back and can't hardly wait.  If they say somethin',
we got to take it up and we got enough trouble at Tara now without
bein' at outs with our neighbors."

Ashley sighed worriedly.  He knew the tempers of his neighbors
better than Will did and he remembered that fully half of the
quarrels and some of the shootings of the days before the war had
risen from the County custom of saying a few words over the coffins
of departed neighbors.  Generally the words were eulogistic in the
extreme but occasionally they were not.  Sometimes, words meant in
the utmost respect were misconstrued by overstrung relatives of the
dead and scarcely were the last shovels of earth mounded above the
coffin before trouble began.

In the absence of a priest Ashley was to conduct the services with
the aid of Carreen's Book of Devotions, the assistance of the
Methodist and Baptist preachers of Jonesboro and Fayetteville
having been tactfully refused.  Carreen, more devoutly Catholic
than her sisters, had been very upset that Scarlett had neglected
to bring a priest from Atlanta with her and had only been a little
eased by the reminder that when the priest came down to marry Will
and Suellen, he could read the services over Gerald.  It was she
who objected to the neighboring Protestant preachers and gave the
matter into Ashley's hands, marking passages in her book for him to
read.  Ashley, leaning against the old secretary, knew that the
responsibility for preventing trouble lay with him and, knowing the
hair-trigger tempers of the County, was at a loss as to how to
proceed.

"There's no help for it, Will," he said, rumpling his bright hair.
"I can't knock Grandma Fontaine down or old man McRae either, and I
can't hold my hand over Mrs. Tarleton's mouth.  And the mildest
thing they'll say is that Suellen is a murderess and a traitor and
but for her Mr. O'Hara would still be alive.  Damn this custom of
speaking over the dead.  It's barbarous."

"Look, Ash," said Will slowly.  "I ain't aimin' to have nobody say
nothin' against Suellen, no matter what they think.  You leave it
to me.  When you've finished with the readin' and the prayin' and
you say:  'If anyone would like to say a few words,' you look right
at me, so I can speak first."

But Scarlett, watching the pallbearers' difficulty in getting the
coffin through the narrow entrance into the burying ground, had no
thought of trouble to come after the funeral.  She was thinking
with a leaden heart that in burying Gerald she was burying one of
the last links that joined her to the old days of happiness and
irresponsibility.

Finally the pallbearers set the coffin down near the grave and
stood clenching and unclenching their aching fingers.  Ashley,
Melanie and Will filed into the inclosure and stood behind the
O'Hara girls.  All the closer neighbors who could crowd in were
behind them and the others stood outside the brick wall.  Scarlett,
really seeing them for the first time, was surprised and touched by
the size of the crowd.  With transportation so limited it was kind
of so many to come.  There were fifty or sixty people there, some
of them from so far away she wondered how they had heard in time to
come.  There were whole families from Jonesboro and Fayetteville
and Lovejoy and with them a few negro servants.  Many small farmers
from far across the river were present and Crackers from the
backwoods and a scattering of swamp folk.  The swamp men were lean
bearded giants in homespun, coon-skin caps on their heads, their
rifles easy in the crooks of their arms, their wads of tobacco
stilled in their cheeks.  Their women were with them, their bare
feet sunk in the soft red earth, their lower lips full of snuff.
Their faces beneath their sun-bonnets were sallow and malarial-
looking but shining clean and their freshly ironed calicoes
glistened with starch.

The near neighbors were there in full force.  Grandma Fontaine,
withered, wrinkled and yellow as an old molted bird, was leaning on
her cane, and behind her were Sally Munroe Fontaine and Young Miss
Fontaine.  They were trying vainly by whispered pleas and jerks at
her skirt to make the old lady sit down on the brick wall.
Grandma's husband, the Old Doctor, was not there.  He had died two
months before and much of the bright malicious joy of life had gone
from her old eyes.  Cathleen Calvert Hilton stood alone as befitted
one whose husband had helped bring about the present tragedy, her
faded sunbonnet hiding her bowed face.  Scarlett saw with amazement
that her percale dress had grease spots on it and her hands were
freckled and unclean.  There were even black crescents under her
fingernails.  There was nothing of quality folks about Cathleen
now.  She looked Cracker, even worse.  She looked poor white,
shiftless, slovenly, trifling.

"She'll be dipping snuff soon, if she isn't doing it already,"
thought Scarlett in horror.  "Good Lord!  What a comedown!"

She shuddered, turning her eyes from Cathleen as she realized how
narrow was the chasm between quality folk and poor whites.

"There but for a lot of gumption am I," she thought, and pride
surged through her as she realized that she and Cathleen had
started with the same equipment after the surrender--empty hands
and what they had in their heads.

"I haven't done so bad," she thought, lifting her chin and smiling.

But she stopped in mid-smile as she saw the scandalized eyes of
Mrs. Tarleton upon her.  Her eyes were red-rimmed from tears and,
after giving Scarlett a reproving look, she turned her gaze back to
Suellen, a fierce angry gaze that boded ill for her.  Behind her
and her husband were the four Tarleton girls, their red locks
indecorous notes in the solemn occasion, their russet eyes still
looking like the eyes of vital young animals, spirited and
dangerous.

Feet were stilled, hats were removed, hands folded and skirts
rustled into quietness as Ashley stepped forward with Carreen's
worn Book of Devotions in his hand.  He stood for a moment looking
down, the sun glittering on his golden head.  A deep silence fell
on the crowd, so deep that the harsh whisper of the wind in the
magnolia leaves came clear to their ears and the far-off
repetitious note of a mockingbird sounded unendurably loud and sad.
Ashley began to read the prayers and all heads bowed as his
resonant, beautifully modulated voice rolled out the brief and
dignified words.

"Oh!" thought Scarlett, her throat constricting.  "How beautiful
his voice is!  If anyone has to do this for Pa, I'm glad it's
Ashley.  I'd rather have him than a priest.  I'd rather have Pa
buried by one of his own folks than a stranger."

When Ashley came to the part of the prayers concerning the souls in
Purgatory, which Carreen had marked for him to read, he abruptly
closed the book.  Only Carreen noticed the omission and looked up
puzzled, as he began the Lord's Prayer.  Ashley knew that half the
people present had never heard of Purgatory and those who had would
take it as a personal affront, if he insinuated, even in prayer,
that so fine a man as Mr. O'Hara had not gone straight to Heaven.
So, in deference to public opinion, he skipped all mention of
Purgatory.  The gathering joined heartily in the Lord's Prayer but
their voices trailed off into embarrassed silence when he began the
Hail Mary.  They had never heard that prayer and they looked
furtively at each other as the O'Hara girls, Melanie and the Tara
servants gave the response:  "Pray for us, now and at the hour of
our death.  Amen."

Then Ashley raised his head and stood for a moment, uncertain.  The
eyes of the neighbors were expectantly upon him as they settled
themselves in easier positions for a long harangue.  They were
waiting for him to go on with the service, for it did not occur to
any of them that he was at the end of the Catholic prayers.  County
funerals were always long.  The Baptist and Methodist ministers who
performed them had no set prayers but extemporized as the
circumstances demanded and seldom stopped before all mourners were
in tears and the bereaved feminine relatives screaming with grief.
The neighbors would have been shocked, aggrieved and indignant, had
these brief prayers been all the service over the body of their
loved friend, and no one knew this better than Ashley.  The matter
would be discussed at dinner tables for weeks and the opinion of
the County would be that the O'Hara girls had not shown proper
respect for their father.

So he threw a quick apologetic glance at Carreen and, bowing his
head again, began reciting from memory the Episcopal burial service
which he had often read over slaves buried at Twelve Oaks.

"I am the Resurrection and the Life . . . and whosoever . . .
believeth in Me shall never die."

It did not come back to him readily and he spoke slowly,
occasionally falling silent for a space as he waited for phrases to
rise from his memory.  But this measured delivery made his words
more impressive, and mourners who had been dry-eyed before began
now to reach for handkerchiefs.  Sturdy Baptists and Methodists
all, they thought it the Catholic ceremony and immediately
rearranged their first opinion that the Catholic services were cold
and Popish.  Scarlett and Suellen were equally ignorant and thought
the words comforting and beautiful.  Only Melanie and Carreen
realized that a devoutly Catholic Irishman was being laid to rest
by the Church of England's service.  And Carreen was too stunned by
grief and her hurt at Ashley's treachery to interfere.

When he had finished, Ashley opened wide his sad gray eyes and
looked about the crowd.  After a pause, his eyes caught those of
Will and he said:  "Is there anyone present who would like to say a
word?"

Mrs. Tarleton twitched nervously but before she could act, Will
stumped forward and standing at the head of the coffin began to
speak.

"Friends," he began in his flat voice, "maybe you think I'm gettin'
above myself, speakin' first--me who never knew Mr. O'Hara till
'bout a year ago when you all have known him twenty years or more.
But this here is my excuse.  If he'd lived a month or so longer,
I'd have had the right to call him Pa."

A startled ripple went over the crowd.  They were too well bred to
whisper but they shifted on their feet and stared at Carreen's
bowed head.  Everyone knew his dumb devotion to her.  Seeing the
direction in which all eyes were cast, Will went on as if he had
taken no note.

"So bein' as how I'm to marry Miss Suellen as soon as the priest
comes down from Atlanta, I thought maybe that gives me the right to
speak first."

The last part of his speech was lost in a faint sibilant buzz that
went through the gathering, an angry beelike buzz.  There were
indignation and disappointment in the sound.  Everyone liked Will,
everyone respected him for what he had done for Tara.  Everyone
knew his affections lay with Carreen, so the news that he was to
marry the neighborhood pariah instead sat ill upon them.  Good old
Will marrying that nasty, sneaking little Suellen O'Hara!

For a moment the air was tense.  Mrs. Tarleton's eyes began to snap
and her lips to shape soundless words.  In the silence, old man
McRae's high voice could be heard imploring his grandson to tell
him what had been said.  Will faced them all, still mild of face,
but there was something in his pale blue eyes which dared them to
say one word about his future wife.  For a moment the balance hung
between the honest affection everyone had for Will and their
contempt for Suellen.  And Will won.  He continued as if his pause
had been a natural one.

"I never knew Mr. O'Hara in his prime like you all done.  All I
knew personally was a fine old gentleman who was a mite addled.
But I've heard tell from you all 'bout what he used to be like.
And I want to say this.  He was a fightin' Irishman and a Southern
gentleman and as loyal a Confederate as ever lived.  You can't get
no better combination than that.  And we ain't likely to see many
more like him, because the times that bred men like him are as dead
as he is.  He was born in a furrin country but the man we're
buryin' here today was more of a Georgian than any of us mournin'
him.  He lived our life, he loved our land and, when you come right
down to it, he died for our Cause, same as the soldiers did.  He
was one of us and he had our good points and our bad points and he
had our strength and he had our failin's.  He had our good points
in that couldn't nothin' stop him when his mind was made up and he
warn't scared of nothin' that walked in shoe leather.  There warn't
nothin' that come to him FROM THE OUTSIDE that could lick him.

"He warn't scared of the English government when they wanted to
hang him.  He just lit out and left home.  And when he come to this
country and was pore, that didn't scare him a mite neither.  He
went to work and he made his money.  And he warn't scared to tackle
this section when it was part wild and the Injuns had just been run
out of it.  He made a big plantation out of a wilderness.  And when
the war come on and his money begun to go, he warn't scared to be
pore again.  And when the Yankees come through Tara and might of
burnt him out or killed him, he warn't fazed a bit and he warn't
licked neither.  He just planted his front feet and stood his
ground.  That's why I say he had our good points.  There ain't
nothin' FROM THE OUTSIDE can lick any of us.

"But he had our failin's too, 'cause he could be licked from the
inside.  I mean to say that what the whole world couldn't do, his
own heart could.  When Mrs. O'Hara died, his heart died too and he
was licked.  And what we seen walking 'round here warn't him."

Will paused and his eyes went quietly around the circle of faces.
The crowd stood in the hot sun as if enchanted to the ground and
whatever wrath they had felt for Suellen was forgotten.  Will's
eyes rested for a moment on Scarlett and they crinkled slightly at
the corners as if he were inwardly smiling comfort to her.
Scarlett, who had been fighting back rising tears, did feel
comforted.  Will was talking common sense instead of a lot of
tootle about reunions in another and better world and submitting
her will to God's.  And Scarlett had always found strength and
comfort in common sense.

"And I don't want none of you to think the less of him for breakin'
like he done.  All you all and me, too, are like him.  We got the
same weakness and failin'.  There ain't nothin' that walks can lick
us, any more than it could lick him, not Yankees nor Carpetbaggers
nor hard times nor high taxes nor even downright starvation.  But
that weakness that's in our hearts can lick us in the time it takes
to bat your eye.  It ain't always losin' someone you love that does
it, like it done Mr. O'Hara.  Everybody's mainspring is different.
And I want to say this--folks whose main-springs are busted are
better dead.  There ain't no place for them in the world these
days, and they're happier bein' dead. . . .  That's why I'm sayin'
you all ain't got no cause to grieve for Mr. O'Hara now.  The time
to grieve was back when Sherman come through and he lost Mrs.
O'Hara.  Now that his body's gone to join his heart, I don't see
that we got reason to mourn, unless we're pretty damned selfish,
and I'm sayin' it who loved him like he was my own pa. . . .  There
won't be no more words said, if you folks don't mind.  The family
is too cut up to listen and it wouldn't be no kindness to them."

Will stopped and, turning to Mrs. Tarleton, he said in a lower
voice:  "I wonder couldn't you take Scarlett in the house, Ma'm?
It ain't right for her to be standin' in the sun so long.  And
Grandma Fontaine don't look any too peart neither, meanin' no
disrespect."

Startled at the abrupt switching from the eulogy to herself,
Scarlett went red with embarrassment as all eyes turned toward her.
Why should Will advertise her already obvious pregnancy?  She gave
him a shamed indignant look, but Will's placid gaze bore her down.

"Please," his look said.  "I know what I'm doin'."

Already he was the man of the house and, not wishing to make a
scene, Scarlett turned helplessly to Mrs. Tarleton.  That lady,
suddenly diverted, as Will had intended, from thoughts of Suellen
to the always fascinating matter of breeding, be it animal or
human, took Scarlett's arm.

"Come in the house, honey."

Her face took on a look of kind, absorbed interest and Scarlett
suffered herself to be led through the crowd that gave way and made
a narrow path for her.  There was a sympathetic murmuring as she
passed and several hands went out to pat her comfortingly.  When
she came abreast Grandma Fontaine, the old lady put out a skinny
claw and said:  "Give me your arm, child," and added with a fierce
glance at Sally and Young Miss:  "No, don't you come.  I don't want
you."

They passed slowly through the crowd which closed behind them and
went up the shady path toward the house, Mrs. Tarleton's eager
helping hand so strong under Scarlett's elbow that she was almost
lifted from the ground at each step.

"Now, why did Will do that?" cried Scarlett heatedly, when they
were out of earshot.  "He practically said:  'Look at her!  She's
going to have a baby!'"

"Well, sake's alive, you are, aren't you?" said Mrs. Tarleton.
"Will did right.  It was foolish of you to stand in the hot sun
when you might have fainted and had a miscarriage."

"Will wasn't bothered about her miscarrying," said Grandma, a
little breathless as she labored across the front yard toward the
steps.  There was a grim, knowing smile on her face.  "Will's
smart.  He didn't want either you or me, Beetrice, at the graveside.
He was scared of what we'd say and he knew this was the only way to
get rid of us. . . .  And it was more than that.  He didn't want
Scarlett to hear the clods dropping on the coffin.  And he's right.
Just remember, Scarlett, as long as you don't hear that sound, folks
aren't actually dead to you.  But once you hear it . . .  Well, it's
the most dreadfully final sound in the world. . . .  Help me up the
steps, child, and give me a hand, Beetrice. Scarlett don't any more
need your arm than she needs crutches and I'm not so peart, as Will
observed. . . .  Will knew you were your father's pet and he didn't
want to make it worse for you than it already was.  He figured it
wouldn't be so bad for your sisters. Suellen has her shame to
sustain her and Carreen her God.  But you've got nothing to sustain
you, have you, child?"

"No," answered Scarlett, helping the old lady up the steps, faintly
surprised at the truth that sounded in the reedy old voice.  "I've
never had anything to sustain me--except Mother."

"But when you lost her, you found you could stand alone, didn't
you?  Well, some folks can't.  Your pa was one.  Will's right.
Don't you grieve.  He couldn't get along without Ellen and he's
happier where he is.  Just like I'll be happier when I join the Old
Doctor."

She spoke without any desire for sympathy and the two gave her
none.  She spoke as briskly and naturally as if her husband were
alive and in Jonesboro and a short buggy ride would bring them
together.  Grandma was too old and had seen too much to fear death.

"But--you can stand alone too," said Scarlett.

"Yes, but it's powerful uncomfortable at times."

"Look here, Grandma," interrupted Mrs. Tarleton, "you ought not to
talk to Scarlett like that.  She's upset enough already.  What with
her trip down here and that tight dress and her grief and the heat,
she's got enough to make her miscarry without your adding to it,
talking grief and sorrow."

"God's nightgown!" cried Scarlett in irritation.  "I'm not upset!
And I'm not one of those sickly miscarrying fools!"

"You never can tell," said Mrs. Tarleton omnisciently.  "I lost my
first when I saw a bull gore one of our darkies and--you remember
my red mare, Nellie?  Now, there was the healthiest-looking mare
you ever saw but she was nervous and high strung and if I didn't
watch her, she'd--"

"Beetrice, hush," said Grandma.  "Scarlett wouldn't miscarry on a
bet.  Let's us sit here in the hall where it's cool.  There's a
nice draft through here.  Now, you go fetch us a glass of
buttermilk, Beetrice, if there's any in the kitchen.  Or look in
the pantry and see if there's any wine.  I could do with a glass.
We'll sit here till the folks come up to say goodby."

"Scarlett ought to be in bed," insisted Mrs. Tarleton, running her
eyes over her with the expert air of one who calculated a pregnancy
to the last minute of its length.

"Get going," said Grandma, giving her a prod with her cane, and
Mrs. Tarleton went toward the kitchen, throwing her hat carelessly
on the sideboard and running her hands through her damp red hair.

Scarlett lay back in her chair and unbuttoned the two top buttons
of her tight basque.  It was cool and dim in the high-ceilinged
hall and the vagrant draft that went from back to front of the
house was refreshing after the heat of the sun.  She looked across
the hall into the parlor where Gerald had lain and, wrenching her
thoughts from him, looked up at the portrait of Grandma Robillard
hanging above the fireplace.  The bayonet-scarred portrait with its
high-piled hair, hall-exposed breasts and cool insolence had, as
always, a tonic effect upon her.

"I don't know which hit Beetrice Tarleton worse, losing her boys or
her horses," said Grandma Fontaine.  "She never did pay much mind
to Jim or her girls, you know.  She's one of those folks Will was
talking about.  Her mainspring's busted.  Sometimes I wonder if she
won't go the way your pa went.  She wasn't ever happy unless horses
or humans were breeding right in her face and none of her girls are
married or got any prospects of catching husbands in this county,
so she's got nothing to occupy her mind.  If she wasn't such lady
at heart, she'd be downright common. . . .  Was Will telling the
truth about marrying Suellen?"

"Yes," said Scarlett, looking the old lady full in the eye.
Goodness, she could remember the time when she was scared to death
of Grandma Fontaine!  Well, she'd grown up since then and she'd
just as soon as not tell her to go to the devil if she meddled in
affairs at Tara.

"He could do better," said Grandma candidly.

"Indeed?" said Scarlett haughtily.

"Come off your high horse, Miss," said the old lady tartly.  "I
shan't attack your precious sister, though I might have if I'd
stayed at the burying ground.  What I mean is with the scarcity of
men in the neighborhood, Will could marry most any of the girls.
There's Beetrice's four wild cats and the Munroe girls and the
McRae--"

"He's going to marry Sue and that's that."

"She's lucky to get him."

"Tara is lucky to get him."

"You love this place, don't you?"

"Yes."

"So much that you don't mind your sister marrying out of her class
as long as you have a man around to care for Tara?"

"Class?" said Scarlett, startled at the idea.  "Class?  What does
class matter now, so long as a girl gets a husband who can take
care of her?"

"That's a debatable question," said Old Miss.  "Some folks would
say you were talking common sense.  Others would say you were
letting down bars that ought never be lowered one inch.  Will's
certainly not quality folks and some of your people were."

Her sharp old eyes went to the portrait of Grandma Robillard.

Scarlett thought of Will, lank, unimpressive, mild, eternally
chewing a straw, his whole appearance deceptively devoid of energy,
like that of most Crackers.  He did not have behind him a long line
of ancestors of wealth, prominence and blood.  The first of Will's
family to set foot on Georgia soil might even have been one of
Oglethorpe's debtors or a bond servant.  Will had not been to
college.  In fact, four years in a backwoods school was all the
education he had ever had.  He was honest and he was loyal, he was
patient and he was hard working, but certainly he was not quality.
Undoubtedly by Robillard standards, Suellen was coming down in the
world.

"So you approve of Will coming into your family?"

"Yes," answered Scarlett fiercely, ready to pounce upon the old
lady at the first words of condemnation.

"You may kiss me," said Grandma surprisingly, and she smiled in her
most approving manner.  "I never liked you much till now, Scarlett.
You were always hard as a hickory nut, even as a child, and I don't
like hard females, barring myself.  But I do like the way you meet
things.  You don't make a fuss about things that can't be helped,
even if they are disagreeable.  You take your fences cleanly like a
good hunter."

Scarlett smiled uncertainly and pecked obediently at the withered
cheek presented to her.  It was pleasant to hear approving words
again, even if she had little idea what they meant.

"There's plenty of folks hereabouts who'll have something to say
about you letting Sue marry a Cracker--for all that everybody likes
Will.  They'll say in one breath what a fine man he is and how
terrible it is for an O'Hara girl to marry beneath her.  But don't
you let it bother you."

"I've never bothered about what people said."

"So I've heard."  There was a hint of acid in the old voice.
"Well, don't bother about what folks say.  It'll probably be a very
successful marriage.  Of course, Will's always going to look like a
Cracker and marriage won't improve his grammar any.  And, even if
he makes a mint of money, he'll never lend any shine and sparkle to
Tara, like your father did.  Crackers are short on sparkle.  But
Will's a gentleman at heart.  He's got the right instincts.  Nobody
but a born gentleman could have put his finger on what is wrong
with us as accurately as he just did, down there at the burying.
The whole world can't lick us but we can lick ourselves by longing
too hard for things we haven't got any more--and by remembering too
much.  Yes, Will will do well by Suellen and by Tara."

"Then you approve of me letting him marry her?"

"God, no!"  The old voice was tired and bitter but vigorous.
"Approve of Crackers marrying into old families?  Bah!  Would I
approve of breeding scrub stock to thoroughbreds?  Oh, Crackers are
good and solid and honest but--"

"But you said you thought it would be a successful match!" cried
Scarlett bewildered.

"Oh, I think it's good for Suellen to marry Will--to marry anybody
for that matter, because she needs a husband bad.  And where else
could she get one?  And where else could you get as good a manager
for Tara?  But that doesn't mean I like the situation any better
than you do."

But I do like it, thought Scarlett trying to grasp the old lady's
meaning.  I'm glad Will is going to marry her.  Why should she
think I minded?  She's taking it for granted that I do mind, just
like her.

She felt puzzled and a little ashamed, as always when people
attributed to her emotions and motives they possessed and thought
she shared.

Grandma fanned herself with her palmetto leaf and went on briskly:
"I don't approve of the match any more than you do but I'm
practical and so are you.  And when it comes to something that's
unpleasant but can't be helped, I don't see any sense in screaming
and kicking about it.  That's no way to meet the ups and downs of
life.  I know because my family and the Old Doctor's family have
had more than our share of ups and downs.  And if we folks have a
motto, it's this:  'Don't holler--smile and bide your time.'  We've
survived a passel of things that way, smiling and biding our time,
and we've gotten to be experts at surviving.  We had to be.  We've
always bet on the wrong horses.  Run out of France with the
Huguenots, run out of England with the Cavaliers, run out of
Scotland with Bonnie Prince Charlie, run out of Haiti by the
niggers and now licked by the Yankees.  But we always turn up on
top in a few years.  You know why?"

She cocked her head and Scarlett thought she looked like nothing so
much as an old, knowing parrot.

"No, I don't know, I'm sure," she answered politely.  But she was
heartily bored, even as she had been the day when Grandma launched
on her memories of the Creek uprising.

"Well, this is the reason.  We bow to the inevitable.  We're not
wheat, we're buckwheat!  When a storm comes along it flattens ripe
wheat because it's dry and can't bend with the wind.  But ripe
buckwheat's got sap in it and it bends.  And when the wind has
passed, it springs up almost as straight and strong as before.  We
aren't a stiff-necked tribe.  We're mighty limber when a hard
wind's blowing, because we know it pays to be limber.  When trouble
comes we bow to the inevitable without any mouthing, and we work
and we smile and we bide our time.  And we play along with lesser
folks and we take what we can get from them.  And when we're strong
enough, we kick the folks whose necks we've climbed over.  That, my
child, is the secret of the survival."  And after a pause, she
added:  "I pass it on to you."

The old lady cackled, as if she were amused by her words, despite
the venom in them.  She looked as if she expected some comment from
Scarlett but the words had made little sense to her and she could
think of nothing to say.

"No, sir," Old Miss went on, "our folks get flattened out but they
rise up again, and that's more than I can say for plenty of people
not so far away from here.  Look at Cathleen Calvert.  You can see
what she's come to.  Poor white!  And a heap lower than the man she
married.  Look at the McRae family.  Flat to the ground, helpless,
don't know what to do, don't know how to do anything.  Won't even
try.  They spend their time whining about the good old days.  And
look at--well, look at nearly anybody in this County except my Alex
and my Sally and you and Jim Tarleton and his girls and some
others.  The rest have gone under because they didn't have any sap
in them, because they didn't have the gumption to rise up again.
There never was anything to those folks but money and darkies, and
now that the money and darkies are gone, those folks will be
Cracker in another generation."

"You forgot the Wilkes."

"No, I didn't forget them.  I just thought I'd be polite and not
mention them, seeing that Ashley's a guest under this roof.  But
seeing as how you've brought up their names--look at them!  There's
India who from all I hear is a dried-up old maid already, giving
herself all kinds of widowed airs because Stu Tarleton was killed
and not making any effort to forget him and try to catch another
man.  Of course, she's old but she could catch some widower with a
big family if she tried.  And poor Honey was always a man-crazy
fool with no more sense than a guinea hen.  And as for Ashley, look
at him!"

"Ashley is a very fine man," began Scarlett hotly.

"I never said he wasn't but he's as helpless as a turtle on his
back.  If the Wilkes family pulls through these hard times, it'll
be Melly who pulls them through.  Not Ashley."

"Melly!  Lord, Grandma!  What are you talking about?  I've lived
with Melly long enough to know she's sickly and scared and hasn't
the gumption to say Boo to a goose."

"Now why on earth should anyone want to say Boo to a goose?  It
always sounded like a waste of time to me.  She might not say Boo
to a goose but she'd say Boo to the world or the Yankee government
or anything else that threatened her precious Ashley or her boy or
her notions of gentility.  Her way isn't your way, Scarlett, or my
way.  It's the way your mother would have acted if she'd lived.
Melly puts me in mind of your mother when she was young. . . .  And
maybe she'll pull the Wilkes family through."

"Oh, Melly's a well-meaning little ninny.  But you are very unjust
to Ashley.  He's--"

"Oh, foot!  Ashley was bred to read books and nothing else.  That
doesn't help a man pull himself out of a tough fix, like we're all
in now.  From what I hear, he's the worst plow hand in the County!
Now you just compare him with my Alex!  Before the war, Alex was
the most worthless dandy in the world and he never had a thought
beyond a new cravat and getting drunk and shooting somebody and
chasing girls who were no better than they should be.  But look at
him now!  He learned farming because he had to learn.  He'd have
starved and so would all of us.  Now he raises the best cotton in
the County--yes, Miss!  It's a heap better than Tara cotton!--and
he knows what to do with hogs and chickens.  Ha!  He's a fine boy
for all his bad temper.  He knows how to bide his time and change
with changing ways and when all this Reconstruction misery is over,
you're going to see my Alex as rich a man as his father and his
grandfather were.  But Ashley--"

Scarlett was smarting at the slight to Ashley.

"It all sounds like tootle to me," she said coldly.

"Well, it shouldn't," said Grandma, fastening a sharp eye upon her.
"For it's just exactly the course you've been following since you
went to Atlanta.  Oh, yes!  We hear of your didoes, even if we are
buried down here in the country.  You've changed with the changing
times too.  We hear how you suck up to the Yankees and the white
trash and the new-rich Carpetbaggers to get money out of them.
Butter doesn't melt in your mouth from all I can hear.  Well, go to
it, I say.  And get every cent out of them you can, but when you've
got enough money, kick them in the face, because they can't serve
you any longer.  Be sure you do that and do it properly, for trash
hanging onto your coat tails can ruin you."

Scarlett looked at her, her brow wrinkling with the effort to
digest the words.  They still didn't make much sense and she was
still angry at Ashley being called a turtle on his back.

"I think you're wrong about Ashley," she said abruptly.

"Scarlett, you just aren't smart."

"That's your opinion," said Scarlett rudely, wishing it were
permissible to smack old ladies' jaws.

"Oh, you're smart enough about dollars and cents.  That's a man's
way of being smart.  But you aren't smart at all like a woman.  You
aren't a speck smart about folks."

Scarlett's eyes began to snap fire and her hands to clench and
unclench.

"I've made you good and mad, haven't I?" asked the old lady,
smiling.  "Well, I aimed to do just that."

"Oh, you did, did you?  And why, pray?"

"I had good and plenty reasons."

Grandma sank back in her chair and Scarlett suddenly realized that
she looked very tired and incredibly old.  The tiny clawlike hands
folded over the fan were yellow and waxy as a dead person's.  The
anger went out of Scarlett's heart as a thought came to her.  She
leaned over and took one of the hands in hers.

"You're a mighty sweet old liar," she said.  "You didn't mean a
word of all this rigmarole.  You've just been talking to keep my
mind off Pa, haven't you?"

"Don't fiddle with me!" said Old Miss grumpily, jerking away her
hand.  "Partly for that reason, partly because what I've been
telling you is the truth and you're just too stupid to realize it."

But she smiled a little and took the sting from her words.
Scarlett's heart emptied itself of wrath about Ashley.  It was nice
to know Grandma hadn't meant any of it.

"Thank you, just the same.  It was nice of you to talk to me--and
I'm glad to know you're with me about Will and Suellen, even if--
even if a lot of other people do disapprove."

Mrs. Tarleton came down the hall, carrying two glasses of
buttermilk.  She did all domestic things badly and the glasses were
slopping over.

"I had to go clear to the spring house to get it," she said.
"Drink it quick because the folks are coming up from the burying
ground.  Scarlett, are you really going to let Suellen marry Will?
Not that he isn't a sight too good for her but you know he is a
Cracker and--"

Scarlett's eyes met those of Grandma.  There was a wicked sparkle
in the old eyes that found an answer in her own.



CHAPTER XLI


When the last good-by had been said and the last sound of wheels
and hooves died away, Scarlett went into Ellen's office and removed
a gleaming object from where she had hidden it the night before
between the yellowed papers in the pigeon-holes of the secretary.
Hearing Pork sniffling in the dining room as he went about laying
the table for dinner she called to him.  He came to her, his black
face as forlorn as a lost and masterless hound.

"Pork," she said sternly, "you cry just once more and I'll--I'll
cry, too.  You've got to stop."

"Yas'm.  Ah try but eve'y time Ah try Ah thinks of Mist' Gerald
an'--"

"Well, don't think.  I can stand everybody else's tears but not
yours.  There," she broke off gently, "don't you see?  I can't
stand yours because I know how you loved him.  Blow your nose,
Pork.  I've got a present for you."

A little interest flickered in Pork's eyes as he blew his nose
loudly but it was more politeness than interest.

"You remember that night you got shot robbing somebody's hen
house?"

"Lawd Gawd, Miss Scarlett!  Ah ain' never--"

"Well, you did, so don't lie to me about it at this late date.  You
remember I said I was going to give you a watch for being so
faithful?"

"Yas'm, Ah 'members.  Ah figgered you'd done fergot."

"No, I didn't forget and here it is."

She held out for him a massive gold watch, heavily embossed, from
which dangled a chain with many fobs and seals.

"Fo' Gawd, Miss Scarlett!" cried Pork.  "Dat's Mist' Gerald's
watch!  Ah done seen him look at dat watch a milyun times!"

"Yes, it's Pa's watch, Pork, and I'm giving it to you.  Take it."

"Oh, no'm!" Pork retreated in horror.  "Dat's a w'ite gempmum's
watch an' Mist' Gerald's ter boot.  Huccome you talk 'bout givin'
it ter me, Miss Scarlett?  Dat watch belong by rights ter lil Wade
Hampton."

"It belongs to you.  What did Wade Hampton ever do for Pa?  Did he
look after him when he was sick and feeble?  Did he bathe him and
dress him and shave him?  Did he stick by him when the Yankees
came?  Did he steal for him?  Don't be a fool, Pork.  If ever
anyone deserved a watch, you do, and I know Pa would approve.
Here."

She picked up the black hand and laid the watch in the palm.  Pork
gazed at it reverently and slowly delight spread over his face.

"Fer me, truly, Miss Scarlett?"

"Yes, indeed."

"Well'm--thankee, Ma'm."

"Would you like for me to take it to Atlanta and have it engraved?"

"Whut's dis engrabed mean?"  Pork's voice was suspicious.

"It means to put writing on the back of it, like--like 'To Pork
from the O'Haras--Well done good and faithful servant.'"

"No'm--thankee.  Ma'm.  Never mind de engrabin'."  Pork retreated a
step, clutching the watch firmly.

A little smile twitched her lips.

"What's the matter, Pork?  Don't you trust me to bring it back?"

"Yas'm, Ah trus'es you--only, well'm, you mout change yo' mind."

"I wouldn't do that."

"Well'm, you mout sell it.  Ah spec it's wuth a heap."

"Do you think I'd sell Pa's watch?"

"Yas'm--ef you needed de money."

"You ought to be beat for that, Pork.  I've a mind to take the
watch back."

"No'm, you ain'!"  The first faint smile of the day showed on
Pork's grief-worn face.  "Ah knows you--An' Miss Scarlett--"

"Yes, Pork?"

"Ef you wuz jes' half as nice ter w'ite folks as you is ter
niggers, Ah spec de worl' would treat you better."

"It treats me well enough," she said.  "Now, go find Mr. Ashley and
tell him I want to see him here, right away."

Ashley sat on Ellen's little writing chair, his long body dwarfing
the frail bit of furniture while Scarlett offered him a half-
interest in the mill.  Not once did his eyes meet hers and he spoke
no word of interruption.  He sat looking down at his hands, turning
them over slowly, inspecting first palms and then backs, as though
he had never seen them before.  Despite hard work, they were still
slender and sensitive looking and remarkably well tended for a
farmer's hands.

His bowed head and silence disturbed her a little and she redoubled
her efforts to make the mill sound attractive.  She brought to
bear, too, all the charm of smile and glance she possessed but they
were wasted, for he did not raise his eyes.  If he would only look
at her!  She made no mention of the information Will had given her
of Ashley's determination to go North and spoke with the outward
assumption that no obstacle stood in the way of his agreement with
her plan.  Still he did not speak and finally, her words trailed
into silence.  There was a determined squareness about his slender
shoulders that alarmed her.  Surely he wouldn't refuse!  What
earthly reason could he have for refusing?

"Ashley," she began again and paused.  She had not intended using
her pregnancy as an argument, had shrunk from the thought of Ashley
even seeing her so bloated and ugly, but as her other persuasions
seemed to have made no impression, she decided to use it and her
helplessness as a last card.

"You must come to Atlanta.  I do need your help so badly now,
because I can't look after the mills.  It may be months before I
can because--you see--well, because . . ."

"Please!" he said roughly.  "Good God, Scarlett!"

He rose and went abruptly to the window and stood with his back to
her, watching the solemn single file of ducks parade across the
barnyard.

"Is that--is that why you won't look at me?" she questioned
forlornly.  "I know I look--"

He swung around in a flash and his gray eyes met hers with an
intensity that made her hands go to her throat.

"Damn your looks!" he said with a swift violence.  "You know you
always look beautiful to me."

Happiness flooded her until her eyes were liquid with tears.

"How sweet of you to say that!  For I was so ashamed to let you see
me--"

"You ashamed?  Why should you be ashamed?  I'm the one to feel
shame and I do.  If it hadn't been for my stupidity you wouldn't be
in this fix.  You'd never have married Frank.  I should never have
let you leave Tara last winter.  Oh, fool that I was!  I should
have known you--known you were desperate, so desperate that you'd--
I should have--I should have--"  His face went haggard.

Scarlett's heart beat wildly.  He was regretting that he had not
run away with her!

"The least I could have done was go out and commit highway robbery
or murder to get the tax money for you when you had taken us in as
beggars.  Oh, I messed it up all the way around!"

Her heart contracted with disappointment and some of the happiness
went from her, for these were not the words she hoped to hear.

"I would have gone anyway," she said tiredly.  "I couldn't have let
you do anything like that.  And anyway, it's done now."

"Yes, it's done now," he said with slow bitterness.  "You wouldn't
have let me do anything dishonorable but you would sell yourself to
a man you didn't love--and bear his child, so that my family and I
wouldn't starve.  It was kind of you to shelter my helplessness."

The edge in his voice spoke of a raw, unhealed wound that ached
within him and his words brought shame to her eyes.  He was swift
to see it and his face changed to gentleness.

"You didn't think I was blaming you?  Dear God, Scarlett!  No.  You
are the bravest woman I've ever known.  It's myself I'm blaming."

He turned and looked out of the window again and the shoulders
presented to her gaze did not look quite so square.  Scarlett
waited a long moment in silence, hoping that Ashley would return to
the mood in which he spoke of her beauty, hoping he would say more
words that she could treasure.  It had been so long since she had
seen him and she had lived on memories until they were worn thin.
She knew he still loved her.  That fact was evident, in every line
of him, in every bitter, self-condemnatory word, in his resentment
at her bearing Frank's child.  She so longed to hear him say it in
words, longed to speak words herself that would provoke a
confession, but she dared not.  She remembered her promise given
last winter in the orchard, that she would never again throw
herself at his head.  Sadly she knew that promise must be kept if
Ashley were to remain near her.  One cry from her of love and
longing, one look that pleaded for his arms, and the matter would
be settled forever.  Ashley would surely go to New York.  And he
must not go away.

"Oh, Ashley, don't blame yourself!  How could it be your fault?
You will come to Atlanta and help me, won't you?"

"No."

"But, Ashley," her voice was beginning to break with anguish and
disappointment, "But I'd counted on you.  I do need you so.  Frank
can't help me.  He's so busy with the store and if you don't come I
don't know where I can get a man!  Everybody in Atlanta who is
smart is busy with his own affairs and the others are so
incompetent and--"

"It's no use, Scarlett."

"You mean you'd rather go to New York and live among Yankees than
come to Atlanta?"

"Who told you that?"  He turned and faced her, faint annoyance
wrinkling his forehead.

"Will."

"Yes, I've decided to go North.  An old friend who made the Grand
Tour with me before the war has offered me a position in his
father's bank.  It's better so, Scarlett.  I'd be no good to you.
I know nothing of the lumber business."

"But you know less about banking and it's much harder!  And I know
I'd make far more allowances for your inexperience than Yankees
would!"

He winced and she knew she had said the wrong thing.  He turned and
looked out of the window again.

"I don't want allowances made for me.  I want to stand on my own
feet for what I'm worth.  What have I done with my life, up till
now?  It's time I made something of myself--or went down through my
own fault.  I've been your pensioner too long already."

"But I'm offering you a half-interest in the mill, Ashley!  You
would be standing on your own feet because--you see, it would be
your own business."

"It would amount to the same thing.  I'd not be buying the half-
interest.  I'd be taking it as a gift.  And I've taken too many
gifts from you already, Scarlett--food and shelter and even clothes
for myself and Melanie and the baby.  And I've given you nothing in
return."

"Oh, but you have!  Will couldn't have--"

"I can split kindling very nicely now."

"Oh, Ashley!" she cried despairingly, tears in her eyes at the
jeering note in his voice.  "What has happened to you since I've
been gone?  You sound so hard and bitter!  You didn't used to be
this way."

"What's happened?  A very remarkable thing, Scarlett.  I've been
thinking.  I don't believe I really thought from the time of the
surrender until you went away from here.  I was in a state of
suspended animation and it was enough that I had something to eat
and a bed to lie on.  But when you went to Atlanta, shouldering a
man's burden, I saw myself as much less than a man--much less,
indeed, than a woman.  Such thoughts aren't pleasant to live with
and I do not intend to live with them any longer.  Other men came
out of the war with less than I had, and look at them now.  So I'm
going to New York."

"But--I don't understand!  If it's work you want, why won't Atlanta
do as well as New York?  And my mill--"

"No, Scarlett.  This is my last chance.  I'll go North.  If I go to
Atlanta and work for you, I'm lost forever."

The word "lost--lost--lost" dinged frighteningly in her heart like
a death bell sounding.  Her eyes went quickly to his but they were
wide and crystal gray and they were looking through her and beyond
her at some fate she could not see, could not understand.

"Lost?  Do you mean--have you done something the Atlanta Yankees
can get you for?  I mean, about helping Tony get away or--or--
Oh, Ashley, you aren't in the Ku Klux, are you?"

His remote eyes came back to her swiftly and he smiled a brief
smile that never reached his eyes.

"I had forgotten you were so literal.  No, it's not the Yankees I'm
afraid of.  I mean if I go to Atlanta and take help from you again,
I bury forever any hope of ever standing alone."

"Oh," she sighed in quick relief, "if it's only that!"

"Yes," and he smiled again, the smile more wintry than before.
"Only that.  Only my masculine pride, my self-respect and, if you
choose to so call it, my immortal soul."

"But," she swung around on another tack, "you could gradually buy
the mill from me and it would be your own and then--"

"Scarlett," he interrupted fiercely, "I tell you, no!  There are
other reasons."

"What reasons?"

"You know my reasons better than anyone in the world."

"Oh--that?  But--that'll be all right," she assured swiftly.  "I
promised, you know, out in the orchard, last winter and I'll keep
my promise and--"

"Then you are surer of yourself than I am.  I could not count on
myself to keep such a promise.  I should not have said that but I
had to make you understand.  Scarlett, I will not talk of this any
more.  It's finished.  When Will and Suellen marry, I am going to
New York."

His eyes, wide and stormy, met hers for an instant and then he went
swiftly across the room.  His hand was on the door knob.  Scarlett
stared at him in agony.  The interview was ended and she had lost.
Suddenly weak from the strain and sorrow of the last day and the
present disappointment, her nerves broke abruptly and she screamed:
"Oh, Ashley!"  And, flinging herself down on the sagging sofa, she
burst into wild crying.

She heard his uncertain footsteps leaving the door and his helpless
voice saying her name over and over above her head.  There was a
swift pattering of feet racing up the hall from the kitchen and
Melanie burst into the room, her eyes wide with alarm.

"Scarlett . . . the baby isn't . . . ?"

Scarlett burrowed her head in the dusty upholstery and screamed
again.

"Ashley--he's so mean!  So doggoned mean--so hateful!"

"Oh, Ashley, what have you done to her?"  Melanie threw herself on
the floor beside the sofa and gathered Scarlett into her arms.
"What have you said?  How could you!  You might bring on the baby!
There, my darling, put your head on Melanie's shoulder!  What is
wrong?"

"Ashley--he's so--so bullheaded and hateful!"

"Ashley, I'm surprised at you!  Upsetting her so much and in her
condition and Mr. O'Hara hardly in his grave!"

"Don't you fuss at him!" cried Scarlett illogically, raising her
head abruptly from Melanie's shoulder, her coarse black hair
tumbling out from its net and her face streaked with tears.  "He's
got a right to do as he pleases!"

"Melanie," said Ashley, his face white, "let me explain.  Scarlett
was kind enough to offer me a position in Atlanta as manager of one
of her mills--"

"Manager!" cried Scarlett indignantly.  "I offered him a half-
interest and he--"

"And I told her I had already made arrangements for us to go North
and she--"

"Oh," cried Scarlett, beginning to sob again, "I told him and told
him how much I needed him--how I couldn't get anybody to manage the
mill--how I was going to have this baby--and he refused to come!
And now--now, I'll have to sell the mill and I know I can't get
anything like a good price for it and I'll lose money and I guess
maybe we'll starve, but he won't care.  He's so mean!"

She burrowed her head back into Melanie's thin shoulder and some of
the real anguish went from her as a flicker of hope woke in her.
She could sense that in Melanie's devoted heart she had an ally,
feel Melanie's indignation that anyone, even her beloved husband,
should make Scarlett cry.  Melanie flew at Ashley like a small
determined dove and pecked him for the first time in her life.

"Ashley, how could you refuse her?  And after all she's done for
us!  How ungrateful you make us appear!  And she so helpless now
with the bab--  How unchivalrous of you!  She helped us when we
needed help and now you deny her when she needs you!"

Scarlett peeped slyly at Ashley and saw surprise and uncertainty
plain in his face as he looked into Melanie's dark indignant eyes.
Scarlett was surprised, too, at the vigor of Melanie's attack, for
she knew Melanie considered her husband beyond wifely reproaches
and thought his decisions second only to God's.

"Melanie . . ." he began and then threw out his hands helplessly.

"Ashley, how can you hesitate?  Think what she's done for us--for
me!  I'd have died in Atlanta when Beau came if it hadn't been for
her!  And she--yes, she killed a Yankee, defending us.  Did you
know that?  She killed a man for us.  And she worked and slaved
before you and Will came home, just to keep food in our mouths.
And when I think of her plowing and picking cotton, I could just--
Oh, my darling!"  And she swooped her head and kissed Scarlett's
tumbled hair in fierce loyalty.  "And now the first time she asks
us to do something for her--"

"You don't need to tell me what she has done for us."

"And Ashley, just think!  Besides helping her, just think what
it'll mean for us to live in Atlanta among our own people and not
have to live with Yankees!  There'll be Auntie and Uncle Henry and
all our friends, and Beau can have lots of playmates and go to
school.  If we went North, we couldn't let him go to school and
associate with Yankee children and have pickaninnies in his class!
We'd have to have a governess and I don't see how we'd afford--"

"Melanie," said Ashley and his voice was deadly quiet, "do you
really want to go to Atlanta so badly?  You never said so when we
talked about going to New York.  You never intimated--"

"Oh, but when we talked about going to New York, I thought there
was nothing for you in Atlanta and, besides, it wasn't my place to
say anything.  It's a wife's duty to go where her husband goes.
But now that Scarlett needs us so and has a position that only you
can fill we can go home!  Home!"  Her voice was rapturous as she
squeezed Scarlett.  "And I'll see Five Points again and Peachtree
road and--and--  Oh, how I've missed them all!  And maybe we could
have a little home of our own!  I wouldn't care how little and
tacky it was but--a home of our own!"

Her eyes blazed with enthusiasm and happiness and the two stared at
her, Ashley with a queer stunned look, Scarlett with surprise
mingled with shame.  It had never occurred to her that Melanie
missed Atlanta so much and longed to be back, longed for a home of
her own.  She had seemed so contented at Tara it came to Scarlett
as a shock that she was homesick.

"Oh Scarlett, how good of you to plan all this for us!  You knew
how I longed for home!"

As usual when confronted by Melanie's habit of attributing worthy
motives where no worth existed, Scarlett was ashamed and irritated,
and suddenly she could not meet either Ashley's or Melanie's eyes.

"We could get a little house of our own.  Do you realize that we've
been married five years and never had a home?"

"You can stay with us at Aunt Pitty's.  That's your home," mumbled
Scarlett, toying with a pillow and keeping her eyes down to hide
dawning triumph in them as she felt the tide turning her way.

"No, but thank you just the same, darling.  That would crowd us so.
We'll get a house--  Oh, Ashley, do say Yes!"

"Scarlett," said Ashley and his voice was toneless, "look at me."

Startled, she looked up and met gray eyes that were bitter and full
of tired futility.

"Scarlett, I will come to Atlanta. . . .  I cannot fight you both."

He turned and walked out of the room.  Some of the triumph in her
heart was dulled by a nagging fear.  The look in his eyes when he
spoke had been the same as when he said he would be lost forever if
he came to Atlanta.



After Suellen and Will married and Carreen went off to Charleston
to the convent, Ashley, Melanie and Beau came to Atlanta, bringing
Dilcey with them to cook and nurse.  Prissy and Pork were left at
Tara until such a time as Will could get other darkies to help him
in the fields and then they, too, would come to town.

The little brick house that Ashley took for his family was on Ivy
Street directly behind Aunt Pitty's house and the two back yards
ran together, divided only by a ragged overgrown privet hedge.
Melanie had chosen it especially for this reason.  She said, on the
first morning of her return to Atlanta as she laughed and cried and
embraced Scarlett and Aunt Pitty, she had been separated from her
loved ones for so long that she could never be close enough to them
again.

The house had originally been two stories high but the upper floor
had been destroyed by shells during the siege and the owner,
returning after the surrender, had lacked the money to replace it.
He had contented himself with putting a flat roof on the remaining
first floor which gave the building the squat, disproportionate
look of a child's playhouse built of shoe boxes.  The house was
high from the ground, built over a large cellar, and the long
sweeping flight of stairs which reached it made it look slightly
ridiculous.  But the flat, squashed look of the place was partly
redeemed by the two fine old oaks which shaded it and a dusty-
leaved magnolia, splotched with white blossoms, standing beside the
front steps.  The lawn was wide and green with thick clover and
bordering it was a straggling, unkempt privet hedge, interlaced
with sweet-smelling honeysuckle vines.  Here and there in the
grass, roses threw out sprangles from crushed old stems and pink
and white crepe myrtle bloomed as valiantly as if war had not
passed over their heads and Yankee horses gnawed their boughs.

Scarlett thought it quite the ugliest dwelling she had ever seen
but, to Melanie, Twelve Oaks in all its grandeur had not been more
beautiful.  It was home and she and Ashley and Beau were at last
together under their own roof.

India Wilkes came back from Macon, where she and Honey had lived
since 1864, and took up her residence with her brother, crowding
the occupants of the little house.  But Ashley and Melanie welcomed
her.  Times had changed, money was scarce, but nothing had altered
the rule of Southern life that families always made room gladly for
indigent or unmarried female relatives.

Honey had married and, so India said, married beneath her, a coarse
Westerner from Mississippi who had settled in Macon.  He had a red
face and a loud voice and jolly ways.  India had not approved of
the match and, not approving, had not been happy in her brother-in-
law's home.  She welcomed the news that Ashley now had a home of
his own, so she could remove herself from uncongenial surroundings
and also from the distressing sight of her sister so fatuously
happy with a man unworthy of her.

The rest of the family privately thought that the giggling and
simple-minded Honey had done far better than could be expected and
they marveled that she had caught any man.  Her husband was a
gentleman and a man of some means; but to India, born in Georgia
and reared in Virginia traditions, anyone not from the eastern
seaboard was a boor and a barbarian.  Probably Honey's husband was
as happy to be relieved of her company as she was to leave him, for
India was not easy to live with these days.

The mantle of spinsterhood was definitely on her shoulders now.
She was twenty-five and looked it, and so there was no longer any
need for her to try to be attractive.  Her pale lashless eyes
looked directly and uncompromisingly upon the world and her thin
lips were ever set in haughty tightness.  There was an air of
dignity and pride about her now that, oddly enough, became her
better than the determined girlish sweetness of her days at Twelve
Oaks.  The position she held was almost that of a widow.  Everyone
knew that Stuart Tarleton would have married her had he not been
killed at Gettysburg, and so she was accorded the respect due a
woman who had been wanted if not wed.

The six rooms of the little house on Ivy Street were soon scantily
furnished with the cheapest pine and oak furniture in Frank's store
for, as Ashley was penniless and forced to buy on credit, he
refused anything except the least expensive and bought only the
barest necessities.  This embarrassed Frank who was fond of Ashley
and it distressed Scarlett.  Both she and Frank would willingly
have given, without any charge, the finest mahogany and carved
rosewood in the store, but the Wilkeses obstinately refused.  Their
house was painfully ugly and bare and Scarlett hated to see Ashley
living in the uncarpeted, uncurtained rooms.  But he did not seem
to notice his surroundings and Melanie, having her own home for the
first time since her marriage, was so happy she was actually proud
of the place.  Scarlett would have suffered agonies of humiliation
at having friends find her without draperies and carpets and
cushions and the proper number of chairs and teacups and spoons.
But Melanie did the honors of her house as though plush curtains
and brocade sofas were hers.

For all her obvious happiness, Melanie was not well.  Little Beau
had cost her her health, and the hard work she had done at Tara
since his birth had taken further toll of her strength.  She was so
thin that her small bones seemed ready to come through her white
skin.  Seen from a distance, romping about the back yard with her
child, she looked like a little girl, for her waist was unbelievably
tiny and she had practically no figure.  She had no bust and her
hips were as flat as little Beau's and as she had neither the pride
nor the good sense (so Scarlett thought) to sew ruffles in the bosom
of her basque or pads on the back of her corsets, her thinness was
very obvious.  Like her body, her face was too thin and too pale and
her silky brows, arched and delicate as a butterfly's feelers, stood
out too blackly against her colorless skin.  In her small face, her
eyes were too large for beauty, the dark smudges under them making
them appear enormous, but the expression in them had not altered
since the days of her unworried girlhood.  War and constant pain and
hard work had been powerless against their sweet tranquillity.  They
were the eyes of a happy woman, a woman around whom storms might
blow without ever ruffling the serene core of her being.

How did she keep her eyes that way, thought Scarlett, looking at
her enviously.  She knew her own eyes sometimes had the look of a
hungry cat.  What was it Rhett had said once about Melanie's eyes--
some foolishness about them being like candles?  Oh, yes, like two
good deeds in a naughty world.  Yes, they were like candles,
candles shielded from every wind, two soft lights glowing with
happiness at being home again among her friends.

The little house was always full of company.  Melanie had been a
favorite even as a child and the town flocked to welcome her home
again.  Everyone brought presents for the house, bric-a-brac,
pictures, a silver spoon or two, linen pillow cases, napkins, rag
rugs, small articles which they had saved from Sherman and
treasured but which they now swore were of no earthly use to them.

Old men who had campaigned in Mexico with her father came to see
her, bringing visitors to meet "old Colonel Hamilton's sweet
daughter."  Her mother's old friends clustered about her, for
Melanie had a respectful deference to her elders that was very
soothing to dowagers in these wild days when young people seemed to
have forgotten all their manners.  Her contemporaries, the young
wives, mothers and widows, loved her because she had suffered what
they had suffered, had not become embittered and always lent them a
sympathetic ear.  The young people came, as young people always
come, simply because they had a good time at her home and met there
the friends they wanted to meet.

Around Melanie's tactful and self-effacing person, there rapidly
grew up a clique of young and old who represented what was left of
the best of Atlanta's ante-bellum society, all poor in purse, all
proud in family, die-hards of the stoutest variety.  It was as if
Atlanta society, scattered and wrecked by war, depleted by death,
bewildered by change, had found in her an unyielding nucleus about
which it could re-form.

Melanie was young but she had in her all the qualities this
embattled remnant prized, poverty and pride in poverty, uncomplaining
courage, gaiety, hospitality, kindness and, above all, loyalty to
all the old traditions.  Melanie refused to change, refused even to
admit that there was any reason to change in a changing world.
Under her roof the old days seemed to come back again and people
took heart and felt even more contemptuous of the tide of wild life
and high living that was sweeping the Carpetbaggers and newly rich
Republicans along.

When they looked into her young face and saw there the inflexible
loyalty to the old days, they could forget, for a moment, the
traitors within their own class who were causing fury, fear and
heartbreak.  And there were many such.  There were men of good
family, driven to desperation by poverty, who had gone over to the
enemy, become Republicans and accepted positions from the
conquerors, so their families would not be on charity.  There were
young ex-soldiers who lacked the courage to face the long years
necessary to build up fortunes.  These youngsters, following the
lead of Rhett Butler, went hand in hand with the Carpetbaggers in
money-making schemes of unsavory kinds.

Worst of all the traitors were the daughters of some of Atlanta's
most prominent families.  These girls who had come to maturity
since the surrender had only childish memories of the war and
lacked the bitterness that animated their elders.  They had lost no
husbands, no lovers.  They had few recollections of past wealth and
splendor--and the Yankee officers were so handsome and finely
dressed and so carefree.  And they gave such splendid balls and
drove such fine horses and simply worshiped Southern girls!  They
treated them like queens and were so careful not to injure their
touchy pride and, after all--why not associate with them?

They were so much more attractive than the town swains who dressed
so shabbily and were so serious and worked so hard that they had
little time to play.  So there had been a number of elopements with
Yankee officers which broke the hearts of Atlanta families.  There
were brothers who passed sisters on the streets and did not speak
and mothers and fathers who never mentioned daughters' names.
Remembering these tragedies, a cold dread ran in the veins of those
whose motto was "No surrender"--a dread which the very sight of
Melanie's soft but unyielding face dispelled.  She was, as the
dowagers said, such an excellent and wholesome example to the young
girls of the town.  And, because she made no parade of her virtues
the young girls did not resent her.

It never occurred to Melanie that she was becoming the leader of a
new society.  She only thought the people were nice to come to see
her and to want her in their little sewing circles, cotillion clubs
and musical societies.  Atlanta had always been musical and loved
good music, despite the sneering comments of sister cities of the
South concerning the town's lack of culture, and there was now an
enthusiastic resurrection of interest that grew stronger as the
times grew harder and more tense.  It was easier to forget the
impudent black faces in the streets and the blue uniforms of the
garrison while they were listening to music.

Melanie was a little embarrassed to find herself at the head of the
newly formed Saturday Night Musical Circle.  She could not account
for her elevation to this position except by the fact that she
could accompany anyone on the piano, even the Misses McLure who
were tone deaf but who would sing duets.

The truth of the matter was that Melanie had diplomatically managed
to amalgamate the Lady Harpists, the Gentlemen's Glee Club and the
Young Ladies Mandolin and Guitar Society with the Saturday Night
Musical Circle, so that now Atlanta had music worth listening to.
In fact, the Circle's rendition of The Bohemian Girl was said by
many to be far superior to professional performances heard in New
York and New Orleans.  It was after she had maneuvered the Lady
Harpists into the fold that Mrs. Merriwether said to Mrs. Meade and
Mrs. Whiting that they must have Melanie at the head of the Circle.
If she could get on with the Harpists, she could get on with
anyone, Mrs. Merriwether declared.  That lady herself played the
organ for the choir at the Methodist Church and, as an organist,
had scant respect for harps or harpists.

Melanie had also been made secretary for both the Association for
the Beautification of the Graves of Our Glorious Dead and the
Sewing Circle for the Widows and Orphans of the Confederacy.  This
new honor came to her after an exciting joint meeting of those
societies which threatened to end in violence and the severance of
lifelong ties of friendship.  The question had arisen at the
meeting as to whether or not weeds should be removed from the
graves of the Union soldiers near those of Confederate soldiers.
The appearance of the scraggly Yankee mounds defeated all the
efforts of the ladies to beautify those of their own dead.
Immediately the fires which smoldered beneath tight basques flamed
wildly and the two organizations split up and glared hostilely.
The Sewing Circle was in favor of the removal of the weeds, the
Ladies of the Beautification were violently opposed.

Mrs. Meade expressed the views of the latter group when she said:
"Dig up the weeds off Yankee graves?  For two cents, I'd dig up all
the Yankees and throw them in the city dump!"

At these ringing words the two associations arose and every lady
spoke her mind and no one listened.  The meeting was being held in
Mrs. Merriwether's parlor and Grandpa Merriwether, who had been
banished to the kitchen, reported afterwards that the noise sounded
just like the opening guns of the battle of Franklin.  And, he
added, he guessed it was a dinged sight safer to be present at the
battle of Franklin than at the ladies' meeting.

Somehow Melanie made her way to the center of the excited throng
and somehow made her usually soft voice heard above the tumult.
Her heart was in her throat with fright at daring to address the
indignant gathering and her voice shook but she kept crying:
"Ladies!  Please!" till the din died down.

"I want to say--I mean, I've thought for a long time that--that not
only should we pull up the weeds but we should plant flowers on--
I--I don't care what you think but every time I go to take flowers
to dear Charlie's grave, I always put some on the grave of an
unknown Yankee which is near by.  It--it looks so forlorn!"

The excitement broke out again in louder words and this time the
two organizations merged and spoke as one.

"On Yankee graves!  Oh, Melly, how could you!"  "And they killed
Charlie!"  "They almost killed you!"  "Why, the Yankees might have
killed Beau when he was born!"  "They tried to burn you out of
Tara!"

Melanie held onto the back of her chair for support, almost
crumpling beneath the weight of a disapproval she had never known
before.

"Oh, ladies!" she cried, pleading.  "Please, let me finish!  I know
I haven't the right to speak on this matter, for none of my loved
ones were killed except Charlie, and I know where he lies, thank
God!  But there are so many among us today who do not know where
their sons and husbands and brothers are buried and--"

She choked and there was a dead silence in the room.

Mrs. Meade's flaming eyes went somber.  She had made the long trip
to Gettysburg after the battle to bring back Darcy's body but no
one had been able to tell her where he was buried.  Somewhere in
some hastily dug trench in the enemy's country.  And Mrs. Allan's
mouth quivered.  Her husband and brother had been on that ill-
starred raid Morgan made into Ohio and the last information she had
of them was that they fell on the banks of the river, just as the
Yankee cavalry stormed up.  She did not know where they lay.  Mrs.
Allison's son had died in a Northern prison camp and she, the
poorest of the poor, was unable to bring his body home.  There were
others who had read on casualty lists:  "Missing--believed dead,"
and in those words had learned the last news they were ever to
learn of men they had seen march away.

They turned to Melanie with eyes that said:  "Why do you open these
wounds again?  These are the wounds that never heal--the wounds of
not knowing where they lie."

Melanie's voice gathered strength in the stillness of the room.

"Their graves are somewhere up in the Yankees' country, just like
the Yankee graves are here, and oh, how awful it would be to know
that some Yankee woman said to dig them up and--"

Mrs. Meade made a small, dreadful sound.

"But how nice it would be to know that some good Yankee woman--
And there must be SOME good Yankee women.  I don't care what people
say, they can't all be bad!  How nice it would be to know that they
pulled weeds off our men's graves and brought flowers to them, even
if they were enemies.  If Charlie were dead in the North it would
comfort me to know that someone--  And I don't care what you ladies
think of me," her voice broke again, "I will withdraw from both
clubs and I'll--I'll pull up every weed off every Yankee's grave I
can find and I'll plant flowers, too--and--I just dare anyone to
stop me!"

With this final defiance Melanie burst into tears and tried to make
her stumbling way to the door.

Grandpa Merriwether, safe in the masculine confines of the Girl of
the Period Saloon an hour later, reported to Uncle Henry Hamilton
that after these words, everybody cried and embraced Melanie and it
all ended up in a love feast and Melanie was made secretary of both
organizations.

"And they are going to pull up the weeds.  The hell of it is Dolly
said I'd be only too pleased to help do it, 'cause I didn't have
anything much else to do.  I got nothing against the Yankees and I
think Miss Melly was right and the rest of those lady wild cats
wrong.  But the idea of me pulling weeds at my time of life and
with my lumbago!"

Melanie was on the board of lady managers of the Orphans' Home and
assisted in the collection of books for the newly formed Young
Men's Library Association.  Even the Thespians who gave amateur
plays once a month clamored for her.  She was too timid to appear
behind the kerosene-lamp footlights, but she could make costumes
out of croker sacks if they were the only material available.  It
was she who cast the deciding vote at the Shakespeare Reading
Circle that the bard's works should be varied with those of Mr.
Dickens and Mr. Bulwer-Lytton and not the poems of Lord Byron, as
had been suggested by a young and, Melanie privately feared, very
fast bachelor member of the Circle.

In the nights of the late summer her small, feebly lighted house
was always full of guests.  There were never enough chairs to go
around and frequently ladies sat on the steps of the front porch
with men grouped about them on the banisters, on packing boxes or
on the lawn below.  Sometimes when Scarlett saw guests sitting on
the grass, sipping tea, the only refreshment the Wilkeses could
afford, she wondered how Melanie could bring herself to expose her
poverty so shamelessly.  Until Scarlett was able to furnish Aunt
Pitty's house as it had been before the war and serve her guests
good wine and juleps and baked ham and cold haunches of venison,
she had no intention of having guests in her house--especially
prominent guests, such as Melanie had.

General John B. Gordon, Georgia's great hero, was frequently there
with his family.  Father Ryan, the poet-priest of the Confederacy,
never failed to call when passing through Atlanta.  He charmed
gatherings there with his wit and seldom needed much urging to
recite his "Sword of Lee" or his deathless "Conquered Banner,"
which never failed to make the ladies cry.  Alex Stephens, late
Vice-President of the Confederacy, visited whenever in town and,
when the word went about that he was at Melanie's, the house was
filled and people sat for hours under the spell of the frail
invalid with the ringing voice.  Usually there were a dozen
children present, nodding sleepily in their parents' arms, up hours
after their normal bedtime.  No family wanted its children to miss
being able to say in after years that they had been kissed by the
great Vice-President or had shaken the hand that helped to guide
the Cause.  Every person of importance who came to town found his
way to the Wilkes home and often they spent the night there.  It
crowded the little flat-topped house, forced India to sleep on a
pallet in the cubbyhole that was Beau's nursery and sent Dilcey
speeding through the back hedge to borrow breakfast eggs from Aunt
Pitty's Cookie, but Melanie entertained them as graciously as if
hers was a mansion.

No, it did not occur to Melanie that people rallied round her as
round a worn and loved standard.  And so she was both astounded and
embarrassed when Dr. Meade, after a pleasant evening at her house
where he acquitted himself nobly in reading the part of Macbeth,
kissed her hand and made observations in the voice he once used in
speaking of Our Glorious Cause.

"My dear Miss Melly, it is always a privilege and a pleasure to be
in your home, for you--and ladies like you--are the hearts of all
of us, all that we have left.  They have taken the flower of our
manhood and the laughter of our young women.  They have broken our
health, uprooted our lives and unsettled our habits.  They have
ruined our prosperity, set us back fifty years and placed too heavy
a burden on the shoulders of our boys who should be in school and
our old men who should be sleeping in the sun.  But we will build
back, because we have hearts like yours to build upon.  And as long
as we have them, the Yankees can have the rest!"



Until Scarlett's figure reached such proportions that even Aunt
Pitty's big black shawl did not conceal her condition, she and
Frank frequently slipped through the back hedge to join the summer-
night gatherings on Melanie's porch.  Scarlett always sat well out
of the light, hidden in the protecting shadows where she was not
only inconspicuous but could, unobserved, watch Ashley's face to
her heart's content.

It was only Ashley who drew her to the house, for the conversations
bored and saddened her.  They always followed a set pattern--first,
hard times; next, the political situation; and then, inevitably,
the war.  The ladies bewailed the high prices of everything and
asked the gentlemen if they thought good times would ever come
back.  And the omniscient gentlemen always said, indeed they would.
Merely a matter of time.  Hard times were just temporary.  The
ladies knew the gentlemen were lying and the gentlemen knew the
ladies knew they were lying.  But they lied cheerfully just the
same and the ladies pretended to believe them.  Everyone knew hard
times were here to stay.

Once the hard times were disposed of, the ladies spoke of the
increasing impudence of the negroes and the outrages of the
Carpetbaggers and the humiliation of having the Yankee soldiers
loafing on every corner.  Did the gentlemen think the Yankees would
ever get through with reconstructing Georgia?  The reassuring
gentlemen thought Reconstruction would be over in no time--that is,
just as soon as the Democrats could vote again.  The ladies were
considerate enough not to ask when this would be.  And having
finished with politics, the talk about the war began.

Whenever two former Confederates met anywhere, there was never but
one topic of conversation, and where a dozen or more gathered
together, it was a foregone conclusion that the war would be
spiritedly refought.  And always the word "if" had the most
prominent part in the talk.

"If England had recognized us--"  "If Jeff Davis had commandeered
all the cotton and gotten it to England before the blockade
tightened--"  "If Longstreet had obeyed orders at Gettysburg--"
"If Jeb Stuart hadn't been away on that raid when Marse Bob needed
him--"  "If we hadn't lost Stonewall Jackson--"  "If Vicksburg
hadn't fallen--"  "If we could have held on another year--"  And
always:  "If they hadn't replaced Johnston with Hood--" or "If
they'd put Hood in command at Dalton instead of Johnston--"

If!  If!  The soft drawling voices quickened with an old excitement
as they talked in the quiet darkness--infantryman, cavalryman,
cannoneer, evoking memories of the days when life was ever at high
tide, recalling the fierce heat of their midsummer in this forlorn
sunset of their winter.

"They don't talk of anything else," thought Scarlett.  "Nothing but
the war.  Always the war.  And they'll never talk of anything but
the war.  No, not until they die."

She looked about, seeing little boys lying in the crooks of their
fathers' arms, breath coming fast, eyes glowing, as they heard of
midnight stories and wild cavalry dashes and flags planted on enemy
breastworks.  They were hearing drums and bugles and the Rebel
yell, seeing footsore men going by in the rain with torn flags
slanting.

"And these children will never talk of anything else either.
They'll think it was wonderful and glorious to fight the Yankees
and come home blind and crippled--or not come home at all.  They
all like to remember the war, to talk about it.  But I don't.  I
don't even like to think about it.  I'd forget it all if I could--
oh, if I only could!"

She listened with flesh crawling as Melanie told tales of Tara,
making Scarlett a heroine as she faced the invaders and saved
Charles' sword, bragging how Scarlett had put out the fire.
Scarlett took no pleasure or pride in the memory of these things.
She did not want to think of them at all.

"Oh, why can't they forget?  Why can't they look forward and not
back?  We were fools to fight that war.  And the sooner we forget
it, the better we'll be."

But no one wanted to forget, no one, it seemed, except herself,
so Scarlett was glad when she could truthfully tell Melanie that
she was embarrassed at appearing, even in the darkness.  This
explanation was readily understood by Melanie who was hypersensitive
about all matters relating to childbirth.  Melanie wanted another
baby badly, but both Dr. Meade and Dr. Fontaine had said another
child would cost her her life.  So, only half resigned to her fate,
she spent most of her time with Scarlett, vicariously enjoying a
pregnancy not her own.  To Scarlett, scarcely wanting her coming
child and irritated at its untimeliness, this attitude seemed the
height of sentimental stupidity.  But she had a guilty sense of
pleasure that the doctors' edict had made impossible any real
intimacy between Ashley and his wife.

Scarlett saw Ashley frequently now but she never saw him alone.  He
came by the house every night on his way home from the mill to
report on the day's work, but Frank and Pitty were usually present
or, worse still, Melanie and India.  She could only ask
businesslike questions and make suggestions and then say:  "It was
nice of you to come by.  Good night."

If only she wasn't having a baby!  Here was a God-given opportunity
to ride out to the mill with him every morning, through the lonely
woods, far from prying eyes, where they could imagine themselves
back in the County again in the unhurried days before the war.

No, she wouldn't try to make him say one word of love!  She
wouldn't refer to love in any way.  She'd sworn an oath to herself
that she would never do that again.  But, perhaps if she were alone
with him once more, he might drop that mask of impersonal courtesy
he had worn since coming to Atlanta.  Perhaps he might be his old
self again, be the Ashley she had known before the barbecue, before
any word of love had been spoken between them.  If they could not
be lovers, they could be friends again and she could warm her cold
and lonely heart in the glow of his friendship.

"If only I could get this baby over and done with," she thought
impatiently, "then I could ride with him every day and we could
talk--"

It was not only the desire to be with him that made her writhe with
helpless impatience at her confinement.  The mills needed her.  The
mills had been losing money ever since she retired from active
supervision, leaving Hugh and Ashley in charge.

Hugh was so incompetent, for all that he tried so hard.  He was a
poor trader and a poorer boss of labor.  Anyone could Jew him down
on prices.  If any slick contractor chose to say that the lumber
was of an inferior grade and not worth the price asked, Hugh felt
that all a gentleman could do was to apologize and take a lower
price.  When she heard of the price he received for a thousand feet
of flooring, she burst into angry tears.  The best grade of
flooring the mill had ever turned out and he had practically given
it away!  And he couldn't manage his labor crews.  The negroes
insisted on being paid every day and they frequently got drunk on
their wages and did not turn up for work the next morning.  On
these occasions Hugh was forced to hunt up new workmen and the mill
was late in starting.  With these difficulties Hugh didn't get into
town to sell the lumber for days on end.

Seeing the profits slip from Hugh's fingers, Scarlett became
frenzied at her impotence and his stupidity.  Just as soon as the
baby was born and she could go back to work, she would get rid of
Hugh and hire some one else.  Anyone would do better.  And she
would never fool with free niggers again.  How could anyone get any
work done with free niggers quitting all the time?

"Frank," she said, after a stormy interview with Hugh over his
missing workmen, "I've about made up my mind that I'll lease
convicts to work the mills.  A while back I was talking to Johnnie
Gallegher, Tommy Wellburn's foreman, about the trouble we were
having getting any work out of the darkies and he asked me why I
didn't get convicts.  It sounds like a good idea to me.  He said I
could sublease them for next to nothing and feed them dirt cheap.
And he said I could get work out of them in any way I liked,
without having the Freedman's Bureau swarming down on me like
hornets, sticking their bills into things that aren't any of their
business.  And just as soon as Johnnie Gallegher's contract with
Tommy is up, I'm going to hire him to run Hugh's mill.  Any man who
can get work out of that bunch of wild Irish he bosses can
certainly get plenty of work out of convicts."

Convicts!  Frank was speechless.  Leasing convicts was the very
worst of all the wild schemes Scarlett had ever suggested, worse
even than her notion of building a saloon.

At least, it seemed worse to Frank and the conservative circles in
which he moved.  This new system of leasing convicts had come into
being because of the poverty of the state after the war.  Unable to
support the convicts, the State was hiring them out to those
needing large labor crews in the building of railroads, in
turpentine forests and lumber camps.  While Frank and his quiet
churchgoing friends realized the necessity of the system, they
deplored it just the same.  Many of them had not even believed in
slavery and they thought this was far worse than slavery had ever
been.

And Scarlett wanted to lease convicts!  Frank knew that if she did
he could never hold up his head again.  This was far worse than
owning and operating the mills herself, or anything else she had
done.  His past objections had always been coupled with the
question:  "What will people say?"  But this--this went deeper than
fear of public opinion.  He felt that it was a traffic in human
bodies on a par with prostitution, a sin that would be on his soul
if he permitted her to do it.

From this conviction of wrongness, Frank gathered courage to forbid
Scarlett to do such a thing, and so strong were his remarks that
she, startled, relapsed into silence.  Finally to quiet him, she
said meekly she hadn't really meant it.  She was just so outdone
with Hugh and the free niggers she had lost her temper.  Secretly,
she still thought about it and with some longing.  Convict labor
would settle one of her hardest problems, but if Frank was going to
take on so about it--

She sighed.  If even one of the mills were making money, she could
stand it.  But Ashley was faring little better with his mill than
Hugh.

At first Scarlett was shocked and disappointed that Ashley did not
immediately take hold and make the mill pay double what it had paid
under her management.  He was so smart and he had read so many
books and there was no reason at all why he should not make a
brilliant success and lots of money.  But he was no more successful
than Hugh.  His inexperience, his errors, his utter lack of
business judgment and his scruples about close dealing were the
same as Hugh's.

Scarlett's love hastily found excuses for him and she did not
consider the two men in the same light.  Hugh was just hopelessly
stupid, while Ashley was merely new at the business.  Still,
unbidden, came the thought that Ashley could never make a quick
estimate in his head and give a price that was correct, as she
could.  And she sometimes wondered if he'd ever learn to
distinguish between planking and sills.  And because he was a
gentleman and himself trustworthy, he trusted every scoundrel who
came along and several times would have lost money for her if she
had not tactfully intervened.  And if he liked a person--and he
seemed to like so many people!--he sold them lumber on credit
without ever thinking to find out if they had money in the bank or
property.  He was as bad as Frank in that respect.

But surely he would learn!  And while he was learning she had a
fond and maternal indulgence and patience for his errors.  Every
evening when he called at her house, weary and discouraged, she was
tireless in her tactful, helpful suggestions.  But for all her
encouragement and cheer, there was a queer dead look in his eyes.
She could not understand it and it frightened her.  He was
different, so different from the man he used to be.  If only she
could see him alone, perhaps she could discover the reason.

The situation gave her many sleepless nights.  She worried about
Ashley, both because she knew he was unhappy and because she knew
his unhappiness wasn't helping him to become a good lumber dealer.
It was a torture to have her mills in the hands of two men with no
more business sense than Hugh and Ashley, heartbreaking to see her
competitors taking her best customers away when she had worked so
hard and planned so carefully for these helpless months.  Oh, if
she could only get back to work again!  She would take Ashley in
hand and then he would certainly learn.  And Johnnie Gallegher
could run the other mill, and she could handle the selling, and
then everything would be fine.  As for Hugh, he could drive a
delivery wagon if he still wanted to work for her.  That was all he
was good for.

Of course, Gallegher looked like an unscrupulous man, for all of
his smartness, but--who else could she get?  Why had the other men
who were both smart and honest been so perverse about working for
her?  If she only had one of them working for her now in place of
Hugh, she wouldn't have to worry so much, but--

Tommy Wellburn, in spite of his crippled back, was the busiest
contractor in town and coining money, so people said.  Mrs.
Merriwether and Rene were prospering and now had opened a bakery
downtown.  Rene was managing it with true French thrift and Grandpa
Merriwether, glad to escape from his chimney corner, was driving
Rene's pie wagon.  The Simmons boys were so busy they were
operating their brick kiln with three shifts of labor a day.  And
Kells Whiting was cleaning up money with his hair straightener,
because he told the negroes they wouldn't ever be permitted to vote
the Republican ticket if they had kinky hair.

It was the same with all the smart young men she knew, the doctors,
the lawyers, the storekeepers.  The apathy which had clutched them
immediately after the war had completely disappeared and they were
too busy building their own fortunes to help her build hers.  The
ones who were not busy were the men of Hugh's type--or Ashley's.

What a mess it was to try to run a business and have a baby too!

"I'll never have another one," she decided firmly.  "I'm not going
to be like other women and have a baby every year.  Good Lord, that
would mean six months out of the year when I'd have to be away from
the mills!  And I see now I can't afford to be away from them even
one day.  I shall simply tell Frank that I won't have any more
children."

Frank wanted a big family, but she could manage Frank somehow.  Her
mind was made up.  This was her last child.  The mills were far
more important.



CHAPTER XLII


Scarlett's child was a girl, a small bald-headed mite, ugly as a
hairless monkey and absurdly like Frank.  No one except the doting
father could see anything beautiful about her, but the neighbors
were charitable enough to say that all ugly babies turned out
pretty, eventually.  She was named Ella Lorena, Ella for her
grandmother Ellen, and Lorena because it was the most fashionable
name of the day for girls, even as Robert E. Lee and Stonewall
Jackson were popular for boys and Abraham Lincoln and Emancipation
for negro children.

She was born in the middle of a week when frenzied excitement
gripped Atlanta and the air was tense with expectation of disaster.
A negro who had boasted of rape had actually been arrested, but
before he could be brought to trial the jail had been raided by the
Ku Klux Klan and he had been quietly hanged.  The Klan had acted to
save the as yet unnamed victim from having to testify in open
court.  Rather than have her appear and advertise her shame, her
father and brother would have shot her, so lynching the negro
seemed a sensible solution to the townspeople, in fact, the only
decent solution possible.  But the military authorities were in a
fury.  They saw no reason why the girl should mind testifying
publicly.

The soldiers made arrests right and left, swearing to wipe out the
Klan if they had to put every white man in Atlanta in jail.  The
negroes, frightened and sullen, muttered of retaliatory house
burnings.  The air was thick with rumors of wholesale hangings by
the Yankees should the guilty parties be found and of a concerted
uprising against the whites by the negroes.  The people of the town
stayed at home behind locked doors and shuttered windows, the men
fearing to go to their businesses and leave their women and
children unprotected.

Scarlett, lying exhausted in bed, feebly and silently thanked God
that Ashley had too much sense to belong to the Klan and Frank was
too old and poor spirited.  How dreadful it would be to know that
the Yankees might swoop down and arrest them at any minute!  Why
didn't the crack-brained young fools in the Klan leave bad enough
alone and not stir up the Yankees like this?  Probably the girl
hadn't been raped after all.  Probably she'd just been frightened
silly and, because of her, a lot of men might lose their lives.

In this atmosphere, as nerve straining as watching a slow fuse burn
toward a barrel of gunpowder, Scarlett came rapidly back to
strength.  The healthy vigor which had carried her through the hard
days at Tara stood her in good stead now, and within two weeks of
Ella Lorena's birth she was strong enough to sit up and chafe at
her inactivity.  In three weeks she was up, declaring she had to
see to the mills.  They were standing idle because both Hugh and
Ashley feared to leave their families alone all day.

Then the blow fell.

Frank, full of the pride of new fatherhood, summoned up courage
enough to forbid Scarlett leaving the house while conditions were
so dangerous.  His commands would not have worried her at all and
she would have gone about her business in spite of them, if he had
not put her horse and buggy in the livery stable and ordered that
they should not be surrendered to anyone except himself.  To make
matters worse, he and Mammy had patiently searched the house while
she was ill and unearthed her hidden store of money.  And Frank had
deposited it in the bank in his own name, so now she could not even
hire a rig.

Scarlett raged at both Frank and Mammy, then was reduced to begging
and finally cried all one morning like a furious thwarted child.
But for all her pains she heard only:  "There, Sugar!  You're just
a sick little girl."  And:  "Miss Scarlett, ef you doan quit
cahyin' on so, you gwine sour yo' milk an' de baby have colic, sho
as gun's iron."

In a furious temper, Scarlett charged through her back yard to
Melanie's house and there unburdened herself at the top of her
voice, declaring she would walk to the mills, she would go about
Atlanta telling everyone what a varmint she had married, she would
not be treated like a naughty simple-minded child.  She would carry
a pistol and shoot anyone who threatened her.  She had shot one man
and she would love, yes, love to shoot another.  She would--

Melanie who feared to venture onto her own front porch was appalled
by such threats.

"Oh, you must not risk yourself!  I should die if anything happened
to you!  Oh, please--"

"I will!  I will!  I will walk--"

Melanie looked at her and saw that this was not the hysteria of a
woman still weak from childbirth.  There was the same breakneck,
headlong determination in Scarlett's face that Melanie had often
seen in Gerald O'Hara's face when his mind was made up.  She put
her arms around Scarlett's waist and held her tightly.

"It's all my fault for not being brave like you and for keeping
Ashley at home with me all this time when he should have been at
the mill.  Oh, dear!  I'm such a ninny!  Darling, I'll tell Ashley
I'm not a bit frightened and I'll come over and stay with you and
Aunt Pitty and he can go back to work and--"

Not even to herself would Scarlett admit that she did not think
Ashley could cope with the situation alone and she shouted:
"You'll do nothing of the kind!  What earthly good would Ashley do
at work if he was worried about you every minute?  Everybody is
just so hateful!  Even Uncle Peter refuses to go out with me!  But
I don't care!  I'll go alone.  I'll walk every step of the way and
pick up a crew of darkies somewhere--"

"Oh, no!  You mustn't do that!  Something dreadful might happen to
you.  They say that Shantytown settlement on the Decatur road is
just full of mean darkies and you'd have to pass right by it.  Let
me think--  Darling, promise me you won't do anything today and
I'll think of something.  Promise me you'll go home and lie down.
You look right peaked.  Promise me."

Because she was too exhausted by her anger to do otherwise,
Scarlett sulkily promised and went home, haughtily refusing any
overtures of peace from her household.

That afternoon a strange figure stumped through Melanie's hedge and
across Pitty's back yard.  Obviously, he was one of those men whom
Mammy and Dilcey referred to as "de riff-raff whut Miss Melly pick
up off de streets an' let sleep in her cellar."

There were three rooms in the basement of Melanie's house which
formerly had been servants' quarters and a wine room.  Now Dilcey
occupied one, and the other two were in constant use by a stream of
miserable and ragged transients.  No one but Melanie knew whence
they came or where they were going and no one but she knew where
she collected them.  Perhaps the negroes were right and she did
pick them up from the streets.  But even as the great and the near
great gravitated to her small parlor, so unfortunates found their
way to her cellar where they were fed, bedded and sent on their way
with packages of food.  Usually the occupants of the rooms were
former Confederate soldiers of the rougher, illiterate type,
homeless men, men without families, beating their way about the
country in hope of finding work.

Frequently, brown and withered country women with broods of tow-
haired silent children spent the night there, women widowed by the
war, dispossessed of their farms, seeking relatives who were
scattered and lost.  Sometimes the neighborhood was scandalized by
the presence of foreigners, speaking little or no English, who had
been drawn South by glowing tales of fortunes easily made.  Once a
Republican had slept there.  At least, Mammy insisted he was a
Republican, saying she could smell a Republican, same as a horse
could smell a rattlesnake; but no one believed Mammy's story, for
there must be some limit even to Melanie's charity.  At least
everyone hoped so.

Yes, thought Scarlett, sitting on the side porch in the pale
November sunshine with the baby on her lap, he is one of Melanie's
lame dogs.  And he's really lame, at that!

The man who was making his way across the back yard stumped, like
Will Benteen, on a wooden leg.  He was a tall, thin old man with a
bald head, which shone pinkishly dirty, and a grizzled beard so
long he could tuck it in his belt.  He was over sixty, to judge by
his hard, seamed face, but there was no sag of age to his body.  He
was lank and ungainly but, even with his wooden peg, he moved as
swiftly as a snake.

He mounted the steps and came toward her and, even before he spoke,
revealing in his tones a twang and a burring of "r s" unusual in
the lowlands, Scarlett knew that he was mountain born.  For all his
dirty, ragged clothes there was about him, as about most
mountaineers, an air of fierce silent pride that permitted no
liberties and tolerated no foolishness.  His beard was stained with
tobacco juice and a large wad in his jaw made his face look
deformed.  His nose was thin and craggy, his eyebrows bushy and
twisted into witches' locks and a lush growth of hair sprang from
his ears, giving them the tufted look of a lynx's ears.  Beneath
his brow was one hollow socket from which a scar ran down his
cheek, carving a diagonal line through his beard.  The other eye
was small, pale and cold, an unwinking and remorseless eye.  There
was a heavy pistol openly in his trouser band and from the top of
his tattered boot protruded the hilt of a bowie knife.

He returned Scarlett's stare coldly and spat across the rail of the
banister before he spoke.  There was contempt in his one eye, not a
personal contempt for her, but for her whole sex.

"Miz Wilkes sont me to work for you," he said shortly.  He spoke
rustily, as one unaccustomed to speaking, the words coming slowly
and almost with difficulty.  "M' name's Archie."

"I'm sorry but I have no work for you, Mr. Archie."

"Archie's m'fuss name."

"I beg your pardon.  What is your last name?"

He spat again.  "I reckon that's my bizness," he said.  "Archie'll
do."

"I don't care what your last name is!  I have nothing for you to
do."

"I reckon you have.  Miz Wilkes was upsot about yore wantin' to run
aroun' like a fool by yoreself and she sont me over here to drive
aroun' with you."

"Indeed?" cried Scarlett, indignant both at the man's rudeness and
Melly's meddling.

His one eye met hers with an impersonal animosity.  "Yes.  A
woman's got no bizness botherin' her men folks when they're tryin'
to take keer of her.  If you're bound to gad about, I'll drive you.
I hates niggers--Yankees too."

He shifted his wad of tobacco to the other cheek and, without
waiting for an invitation, sat down on the top step.  "I ain't
sayin' I like drivin' women aroun', but Miz Wilkes been good to me,
lettin' me sleep in her cellar, and she sont me to drive you."

"But--" began Scarlett helplessly and then she stopped and looked
at him.  After a moment she began to smile.  She didn't like the
looks of this elderly desperado but his presence would simplify
matters.  With him beside her, she could go to town, drive to the
mills, call on customers.  No one could doubt her safety with him
and his very appearance was enough to keep from giving rise to
scandal.

"It's a bargain," she said.  "That is, if my husband agrees."

After a private conversation with Archie, Frank gave his reluctant
approval and sent word to the livery stable to release the horse
and buggy.  He was hurt and disappointed that motherhood had not
changed Scarlett as he had hoped it would but, if she was
determined to go back to her damnable mills, then Archie was a
godsend.

So began the relationship that at first startled Atlanta.  Archie
and Scarlett were a queerly assorted pair, the truculent dirty old
man with his wooden peg sticking stiffly out over the dashboard and
the pretty, neatly dressed young woman with forehead puckered in an
abstracted frown.  They could be seen at all hours and at all
places in and near Atlanta, seldom speaking to each other,
obviously disliking each other, but bound together by mutual need,
he of money, she of protection.  At least, said the ladies of the
town, it's better than riding around so brazenly with that Butler
man.  They wondered curiously where Rhett was these days, for he
had abruptly left town three months before and no one, not even
Scarlett, knew where he was.

Archie was a silent man, never speaking unless spoken to and
usually answering with grunts.  Every morning he came from
Melanie's cellar and sat on the front steps of Pitty's house,
chewing and spitting until Scarlett came out and Peter brought the
buggy from the stable.  Uncle Peter feared him only a little less
than the devil or the Ku Klux and even Mammy walked silently and
timorously around him.  He hated negroes and they knew it and
feared him.  He reinforced his pistol and knife with another
pistol, and his fame spread far among the black population.  He
never once had to draw a pistol or even lay his hand on his belt.
The moral effect was sufficient.  No negro dared even laugh while
Archie was in hearing.

Once Scarlett asked him curiously why he hated negroes and was
surprised when he answered, for generally all questions were
answered by "I reckon that's my bizness."

"I hates them, like all mountain folks hates them.  We never liked
them and we never owned none.  It was them niggers that started the
war.  I hates them for that, too."

"But you fought in the war."

"I reckon that's a man's privilege.  I hates Yankees too, more'n I
hates niggers.  Most as much as I hates talkative women."

It was such outspoken rudeness as this that threw Scarlett into
silent furies and made her long to be rid of him.  But how could
she do without him?  In what other way could she obtain such
freedom?  He was rude and dirty and, occasionally, very odorous but
he served his purpose.  He drove her to and from the mills and on
her round of customers, spitting and staring off into space while
she talked and gave orders.  If she climbed down from the buggy, he
climbed after her and dogged her footsteps.  When she was among
rough laborers, negroes or Yankee soldiers, he was seldom more than
a pace from her elbow.

Soon Atlanta became accustomed to seeing Scarlett and her bodyguard
and, from being accustomed, the ladies grew to envy her her freedom
of movement.  Since the Ku Klux lynching, the ladies had been
practically immured, not even going to town to shop unless there
were half a dozen in their group.  Naturally social minded, they
became restless and, putting their pride in their pockets, they
began to beg the loan of Archie from Scarlett.  And whenever she
did not need him, she was gracious enough to spare him for the use
of other ladies.

Soon Archie became an Atlanta institution and the ladies competed
for his free time.  There was seldom a morning when a child or a
negro servant did not arrive at breakfast time with a note saying:
"If you aren't using Archie this afternoon, do let me have him.  I
want to drive to the cemetery with flowers."  "I must go to the
milliners."  "I should like Archie to drive Aunt Nelly for an
airing."  "I must go calling on Peters Street and Grandpa is not
feeling well enough to take me.  Could Archie--"

He drove them all, maids, matrons and widows, and toward all he
evidenced the same uncompromising contempt.  It was obvious that he
did not like women, Melanie excepted, any better than he liked
negroes and Yankees.  Shocked at first by his rudeness, the ladies
finally became accustomed to him and, as he was so silent, except
for intermittent explosions of tobacco juice, they took him as much
for granted as the horses he drove and forgot his very existence.
In fact, Mrs. Merriwether related to Mrs. Meade the complete
details of her niece's confinement before she even remembered
Archie's presence on the front seat of the carriage.

At no other time than this could such a situation have been
possible.  Before the war, he would not have been permitted even in
the ladies' kitchens.  They would have handed him food through the
back door and sent him about his business.  But now they welcomed
his reassuring presence.  Rude, illiterate, dirty, he was a bulwark
between the ladies and the terrors of Reconstruction.  He was
neither friend nor servant.  He was a hired bodyguard, protecting
the women while their men worked by day or were absent from home at
night.

It seemed to Scarlett that after Archie came to work for her Frank
was away at night very frequently.  He said the books at the store
had to be balanced and business was brisk enough now to give him
little time to attend to this in working hours.  And there were
sick friends with whom he had to sit.  Then there was the
organization of Democrats who forgathered every Wednesday night to
devise ways of regaining the ballot and Frank never missed a
meeting.  Scarlett thought this organization did little else except
argue the merits of General John B. Gordon over every other
general, except General Lee, and refight the war.  Certainly she
could observe no progress in the direction of the recovery of the
ballot.  But Frank evidently enjoyed the meetings for he stayed out
until all hours on those nights.

Ashley also sat up with the sick and he, too, attended the
Democratic meetings and he was usually away on the same nights as
Frank.  On these nights, Archie escorted Pitty, Scarlett, Wade and
little Ella though the back yard to Melanie's house and the two
families spent the evenings together.  The ladies sewed while
Archie lay full length on the parlor sofa snoring, his gray
whiskers fluttering at each rumble.  No one had invited him to
dispose himself on the sofa and as it was the finest piece of
furniture in the house, the ladies secretly moaned every time he
lay down on it, planting his boot on the pretty upholstery.  But
none of them had the courage to remonstrate with him.  Especially
after he remarked that it was lucky he went to sleep easy, for
otherwise the sound of women clattering like a flock of guinea hens
would certainly drive him crazy.

Scarlett sometimes wondered where Archie had come from and what his
life had been before he came to live in Melly's cellar but she
asked no questions.  There was that about his grim one-eyed face
which discouraged curiosity.  All she knew was that his voice
bespoke the mountains to the north and that he had been in the army
and had lost both leg and eye shortly before the surrender.  It was
words spoken in a fit of anger against Hugh Elsing which brought
out the truth of Archie's past.

One morning, the old man had driven her to Hugh's mill and she had
found it idle, the negroes gone and Hugh sitting despondently under
a tree.  His crew had not made their appearance that morning and he
was at a loss as to what to do.  Scarlett was in a furious temper
and did not scruple to expend it on Hugh, for she had just received
an order for a large amount of lumber--a rush order at that.  She
had used energy and charm and bargaining to get that order and now
the mill was quiet.

"Drive me out to the other mill," she directed Archie.  "Yes, I
know it'll take a long time and we won't get any dinner but what am
I paying you for?  I'll have to make Mr. Wilkes stop what he's
doing and run me off this lumber.  Like as not, his crew won't be
working either.  Great balls of fire!  I never saw such a
nincompoop as Hugh Elsing!  I'm going to get rid of him just as
soon as that Johnnie Gallegher finishes the stores he's building.
What do I care if Gallegher was in the Yankee Army?  He'll work.  I
never saw a lazy Irishman yet.  And I'm through with free issue
darkies.  You just can't depend on them.  I'm going to get Johnnie
Gallegher and lease me some convicts.  He'll get work out of them.
He'll--"

Archie turned to her, his eye malevolent, and when he spoke there
was cold anger in his rusty voice.

"The day you gits convicts is the day I quits you," he said.

Scarlett was startled.  "Good heavens!  Why?"

"I knows about convict leasin'.  I calls it convict murderin'.
Buyin' men like they was mules.  Treatin' them worse than mules
ever was treated.  Beatin' them, starvin' them, killin' them.  And
who cares?  The State don't care.  It's got the lease money.  The
folks that gits the convicts, they don't care.  All they want is to
feed them cheap and git all the work they can out of them.  Hell,
Ma'm.  I never thought much of women and I think less of them now."

"Is it any of your business?"

"I reckon," said Archie laconically and, after a pause, "I was a
convict for nigh on to forty years."

Scarlett gasped, and, for a moment, shrank back against the
cushions.  This then was the answer to the riddle of Archie, his
unwillingness to tell his last name or the place of his birth or
any scrap of his past life, the answer to the difficulty with which
he spoke and his cold hatred of the world.  Forty years!  He must
have gone into prison a young man.  Forty years!  Why--he must have
been a life prisoner and lifers were--

"Was it--murder?"

"Yes," answered Archie briefly, as he flapped the reins.  "M'
wife."

Scarlett's eyelids batted rapidly with fright.

The mouth beneath the beard seemed to move, as if he were smiling
grimly at her fear.  "I ain't goin' to kill you, Ma'm, if that's
what's frettin' you.  Thar ain't but one reason for killin' a
woman."

"You killed your wife!"

"She was layin' with my brother.  He got away.  I ain't sorry none
that I kilt her.  Loose women ought to be kilt.  The law ain't got
no right to put a man in jail for that but I was sont."

"But--how did you get out?  Did you escape?  Were you pardoned?"

"You might call it a pardon."  His thick gray brows writhed
together as though the effort of stringing words together was
difficult.

"'Long in 'sixty-four when Sherman come through, I was at
Milledgeville jail, like I had been for forty years.  And the
warden he called all us prisoners together and he says the Yankees
are a-comin' a-burnin' and a-killin'.  Now if thar's one thing I
hates worse than a nigger or a woman, it's a Yankee."

"Why?  Had you--  Did you ever know any Yankees?"

"No'm.  But I'd hearn tell of them.  I'd hearn tell they couldn't
never mind their own bizness.  I hates folks who can't mind their
own bizness.  What was they doin' in Georgia, freein' our niggers
and burnin' our houses and killin' our stock?  Well, the warden he
said the army needed more soldiers bad, and any of us who'd jine up
would be free at the end of the war--if we come out alive.  But us
lifers--us murderers, the warden he said the army didn't want us.
We was to be sont somewheres else to another jail.  But I said to
the warden I ain't like most lifers.  I'm just in for killin' my
wife and she needed killin'.  And I wants to fight the Yankees.
And the warden he saw my side of it and he slipped me out with the
other prisoners."

He paused and grunted.

"Huh.  That was right funny.  They put me in jail for killin' and
they let me out with a gun in my hand and a free pardon to do more
killin'.  It shore was good to be a free man with a rifle in my
hand again.  Us men from Milledgeville did good fightin' and
killin'--and a lot of us was kilt.  I never knowed one who
deserted.  And when the surrender come, we was free.  I lost this
here leg and this here eye.  But I ain't sorry."

"Oh," said Scarlett, weakly.

She tried to remember what she had heard about the releasing of the
Milledgeville convicts in that last desperate effort to stem the
tide of Sherman's army.  Frank had mentioned it that Christmas of
1864.  What had he said?  But her memories of that time were too
chaotic.  Again she felt the wild terror of those days, heard the
siege guns, saw the line of wagons dripping blood into the red
roads, saw the Home Guard marching off, the little cadets and the
children like Phil Meade and the old men like Uncle Henry and
Grandpa Merriwether.  And the convicts had marched out too, to die
in the twilight of the Confederacy, to freeze in the snow and sleet
of that last campaign in Tennessee.

For a brief moment she thought what a fool this old man was, to
fight for a state which had taken forty years from his life.
Georgia had taken his youth and his middle years for a crime that
was no crime to him, yet he had freely given a leg and an eye to
Georgia.  The bitter words Rhett had spoken in the early days of
the war came back to her, and she remembered him saying he would
never fight for a society that had made him an outcast.  But when
the emergency had arisen he had gone off to fight for that same
society, even as Archie had done.  It seemed to her that all
Southern men, high or low, were sentimental fools and cared less
for their hides than for words which had no meaning.

She looked at Archie's gnarled old hands, his two pistols and his
knife, and fear pricked her again.  Were there other ex-convicts at
large, like Archie, murderers, desperadoes, thieves, pardoned for
their crimes, in the name of the Confederacy?  Why, any stranger on
the street might be a murderer!  If Frank ever learned the truth
about Archie, there would be the devil to pay.  Or if Aunt Pitty--
but the shock would kill Pitty.  And as for Melanie--Scarlett
almost wished she could tell Melanie the truth about Archie.  It
would serve her right for picking up trash and foisting it off on
her friends and relatives.

"I'm--I'm glad you told me, Archie.  I--I won't tell anyone.  It
would be a great shock to Mrs. Wilkes and the other ladies if they
knew."

"Huh.  Miz Wilkes knows.  I told her the night she fuss let me
sleep in her cellar.  You don't think I'd let a nice lady like her
take me into her house not knowin'?"

"Saints preserve us!" cried Scarlet, aghast.

Melanie knew this man was a murderer and a woman murderer at that
and she hadn't ejected him from her house.  She had trusted her son
with him and her aunt and sister-in-law and all her friends.  And
she, the most timid of females, had not been frightened to be alone
with him in her house.

"Miz Wilkes is right sensible, for a woman.  She 'lowed that I was
all right.  She 'lowed that a liar allus kept on lyin' and a thief
kept on stealin' but folks don't do more'n one murder in a
lifetime.  And she reckoned as how anybody who'd fought for the
Confederacy had wiped out anything bad they'd done.  Though I don't
hold that I done nothin' bad, killin' my wife. . . .  Yes, Miz
Wilkes is right sensible, for a woman. . . .  And I'm tellin' you,
the day you leases convicts is the day I quits you."

Scarlett made no reply but she thought,

"The sooner you quit me the better it will suit me.  A murderer!"

How could Melly have been so--so--  Well, there was no word for
Melanie's action in taking in this old ruffian and not telling her
friends he was a jailbird.  So service in the army wiped out past
sins!  Melanie had that mixed up with baptism!  But then Melly was
utterly silly about the Confederacy, its veterans, and anything
pertaining to them.  Scarlett silently damned the Yankees and added
another mark on her score against them.  They were responsible for
a situation that forced a woman to keep a murderer at her side to
protect her.



Driving home with Archie in the chill twilight, Scarlett saw a
clutter of saddle horses, buggies and wagons outside the Girl of
the Period Saloon.  Ashley was sitting on his horse, a strained
alert look on his face; the Simmons boys were leaning from their
buggy, making emphatic gestures; Hugh Elsing, his lock of brown
hair falling in his eyes, was waving his hands.  Grandpa
Merriwether's pie wagon was in the center of the tangle and, as she
came closer, Scarlett saw that Tommy Wellburn and Uncle Henry
Hamilton were crowded on the seat with him.

"I wish," thought Scarlett irritably, "that Uncle Henry wouldn't
ride home in that contraption.  He ought to be ashamed to be seen
in it.  It isn't as though he didn't have a horse of his own.  He
just does it so he and Grandpa can go to the saloon together every
night."

As she came abreast the crowd something of their tenseness reached
her, insensitive though she was, and made fear clutch at her heart.

"Oh!" she thought.  "I hope no one else has been raped!  If the Ku
Klux lynch just one more darky the Yankees will wipe us out!"  And
she spoke to Archie.  "Pull up.  Something's wrong."

"You ain't goin' to stop outside a saloon," said Archie.

"You heard me.  Pull up.  Good evening, everybody.  Ashley--Uncle
Henry--is something wrong?  You all look so--"

The crowd turned to her, tipping their hats and smiling, but there
was a driving excitement in their eyes.

"Something's right and something's wrong," barked Uncle Henry.
"Depends on how you look at it.  The way I figure is the
legislature couldn't have done different."

The legislature? thought Scarlett in relief.  She had little
interest in the legislature, feeling that its doings could hardly
affect her.  It was the prospect of the Yankee soldiers on a
rampage again that frightened her.

"What's the legislature been up to now?"

"They've flatly refused to ratify the amendment," said Grandpa
Merriwether and there was pride in his voice.  "That'll show the
Yankees."

"And there'll be hell to pay for it--I beg your pardon, Scarlett,"
said Ashley.

"Oh, the amendment?" questioned Scarlett, trying to look intelligent.

Politics were beyond her and she seldom wasted time thinking about
them.  There had been a Thirteenth Amendment ratified sometime
before or maybe it had been the Sixteenth Amendment but what
ratification meant she had no idea.  Men were always getting
excited about such things.  Something of her lack of comprehension
showed in her face and Ashley smiled.

"It's the amendment letting the darkies vote, you know," he
explained.  "It was submitted to the legislature and they refused
to ratify it."

"How silly of them!  You know the Yankees are going to force it
down our throats!"

"That's what I meant by saying there'd be hell to pay," said
Ashley.

"I'm proud of the legislature, proud of their gumption!" shouted
Uncle Henry.  "The Yankees can't force it down our throats if we
won't have it."

"They can and they will."  Ashley's voice was calm but there was
worry in his eyes.  "And it'll make things just that much harder
for us."

"Oh, Ashley, surely not!  Things couldn't be any harder than they
are now!"

"Yes, things can get worse, even worse than they are now.  Suppose
we have a darky legislature?  A darky governor?  Suppose we have a
worse military rule than we now have?"

Scarlett's eyes grew large with fear as some understanding entered
her mind.

"I've been trying to think what would be best for Georgia, best for
all of us."  Ashley's face was drawn.  "Whether it's wisest to
fight this thing like the legislature has done, rouse the North
against us and bring the whole Yankee Army on us to cram the darky
vote down us, whether we want it or not.  Or--swallow our pride as
best we can, submit gracefully and get the whole matter over with
as easily as possible.  It will amount to the same thing in the
end.  We're helpless.  We've got to take the dose they're
determined to give us.  Maybe it would be better for us to take it
without kicking."

Scarlett hardly heard his words, certainly their full import went
over her head.  She knew that Ashley, as usual, was seeing both
sides of a question.  She was seeing only one side--how this slap
in the Yankees' faces might affect her.

"Going to turn Radical and vote the Republican ticket, Ashley?"
jeered Grandpa Merriwether harshly.

There was a tense silence.  Scarlett saw Archie's hand make a swift
move toward his pistol and then stop.  Archie thought, and
frequently said, that Grandpa was an old bag of wind and Archie had
no intention of letting him insult Miss Melanie's husband, even if
Miss Melanie's husband was talking like a fool.

The perplexity vanished suddenly from Ashley's eyes and hot anger
flared.  But before he could speak, Uncle Henry charged Grandpa.

"You God--you blast--I beg your pardon, Scarlett--Grandpa, you
jackass, don't you say that to Ashley!"

"Ashley can take care of himself without you defending him," said
Grandpa coldly.  "And he is talking like a Scallawag.  Submit,
hell!  I beg your pardon, Scarlett."

"I didn't believe in secession," said Ashley and his voice shook
with anger.  "But when Georgia seceded, I went with her.  And I
didn't believe in war but I fought in the war.  And I don't believe
in making the Yankees madder than they already are.  But if the
legislature has decided to do it, I'll stand by the legislature.
I--"

"Archie," said Uncle Henry abruptly, "drive Miss Scarlett on home.
This isn't any place for her.  Politics aren't for women folks
anyway, and there's going to be cussing in a minute.  Go on,
Archie.  Good night, Scarlett."

As they drove off down Peachtree Street, Scarlett's heart was
beating fast with fear.  Would this foolish action of the
legislature have any effect on her safety?  Would it so enrage the
Yankees that she might lose her mills?

"Well, sir," rumbled Archie, "I've hearn tell of rabbits spittin'
in bulldogs' faces but I ain't never seen it till now.  Them
legislatures might just as well have hollered 'Hurray for Jeff
Davis and the Southern Confederacy' for all the good it'll do them--
and us.  Them nigger-lovin' Yankees have made up their mind to
make the niggers our bosses.  But you got to admire them
legislatures' sperrit!"

"Admire them?  Great balls of fire!  Admire them?  They ought to be
shot!  It'll bring the Yankees down on us like a duck on a June
bug.  Why couldn't they have rati--radi--whatever they were
supposed to do to it and smoothed the Yankees down instead of
stirring them up again?  They're going to make us knuckle under and
we may as well knuckle now as later."

Archie fixed her with a cold eye.

"Knuckle under without a fight?  Women ain't got no more pride than
goats."



When Scarlett leased ten convicts, five for each of her mills,
Archie made good his threat and refused to have anything further to
do with her.  Not all Melanie's pleading or Frank's promises of
higher pay would induce him to take up the reins again.  He
willingly escorted Melanie and Pitty and India and their friends
about the town but not Scarlett.  He would not even drive for the
other ladies if Scarlett was in the carriage.  It was an
embarrassing situation, having the old desperado sitting in
judgment upon her, and it was still more embarrassing to know that
her family and friends agreed with the old man.

Frank pleaded with her against taking the step.  Ashley at first
refused to work convicts and was persuaded, against his will, only
after tears and supplications and promises that when times were
better she would hire free darkies.  Neighbors were so outspoken in
their disapproval that Frank, Pitty and Melanie found it hard to
hold up their heads.  Even Peter and Mammy declared that it was bad
luck to work convicts and no good would come of it.  Everyone said
it was wrong to take advantage of the miseries and misfortunes of
others.

"You didn't have any objections to working slaves!" Scarlett cried
indignantly.

Ah, but that was different.  Slaves were neither miserable nor
unfortunate.  The negroes were far better off under slavery than
they were now under freedom, and if she didn't believe it, just
look about her!  But, as usual, opposition had the effect of making
Scarlett more determined on her course.  She removed Hugh from the
management of the mill, put him to driving a lumber wagon and
closed the final details of hiring Johnnie Gallegher.

He seemed to be the only person she knew who approved of the
convicts.  He nodded his bullet head briefly and said it was a
smart move.  Scarlett, looking at the little ex-jockey, planted
firmly on his short bowed legs, his gnomish face hard and
businesslike, thought:  "Whoever let him ride their horses didn't
care much for horse flesh.  I wouldn't let him get within ten feet
of any horse of mine."

But she had no qualms in trusting him with a convict gang.

"And I'm to have a free hand with the gang?" he questioned, his
eyes as cold as gray agates.

"A free hand.  All I ask is that you keep that mill running and
deliver my lumber when I want it and as much as I want."

"I'm your man," said Johnnie shortly.  "I'll tell Mr. Wellburn I'm
leaving him."

As he rolled off through the crowd of masons and carpenters and hod
carriers Scarlett felt relieved and her spirits rose.  Johnnie was
indeed her man.  He was tough and hard and there was no nonsense
about him.  "Shanty Irish on the make," Frank had contemptuously
called him, but for that very reason Scarlett valued him.  She knew
that an Irishman with a determination to get somewhere was a
valuable man to have, regardless of what his personal characteristics
might be.  And she felt a closer kinship with him than with many men
of her own class, for Johnnie knew the value of money.

The first week he took over the mill he justified all her hopes,
for he accomplished more with five convicts than Hugh had ever done
with his crew of ten free negroes.  More than that, he gave
Scarlett greater leisure than she had had since she came to Atlanta
the year before, because he had no liking for her presence at the
mill and said so frankly.

"You tend to your end of selling and let me tend to my end of
lumbering," he said shortly.  "A convict camp ain't any place for a
lady and if nobody else'll tell you so, Johnnie Gallegher's telling
you now.  I'm delivering your lumber, ain't I?  Well, I've got no
notion to be pestered every day like Mr. Wilkes.  He needs
pestering.  I don't."

So Scarlett reluctantly stayed away from Johnnie's mill, fearing
that if she came too often he might quit and that would be ruinous.
His remark that Ashley needed pestering stung her, for there was
more truth in it than she liked to admit.  Ashley was doing little
better with convicts than he had done with free labor, although
why, he was unable to tell.  Moreover, he looked as if he were
ashamed to be working convicts and he had little to say to her
these days.

Scarlett was worried by the change that was coming over him.  There
were gray hairs in his bright head now and a tired slump in his
shoulders.  And he seldom smiled.  He no longer looked the
debonaire Ashley who had caught her fancy so many years before.  He
looked like a man secretly gnawed by a scarcely endurable pain and
there was a grim tight look about his mouth that baffled and hurt
her.  She wanted to drag his head fiercely down on her shoulder,
stroke the graying hair and cry:  "Tell me what's worrying you!
I'll fix it!  I'll make it right for you!"

But his formal, remote air kept her at arm's length.



CHAPTER XLIII


It was one of those rare December days when the sun was almost as
warm as Indian summer.  Dry red leaves still clung to the oak in
Aunt Pitty's yard and a faint yellow green still persisted in the
dying grass.  Scarlett, with the baby in her arms, stepped out onto
the side porch and sat down in a rocking chair in a patch of
sunshine.  She was wearing a new green challis dress trimmed with
yards and yards of black rickrack braid and a new lace house cap
which Aunt Pitty had made for her.  Both were very becoming to her
and she knew it and took great pleasure in them.  How good it was
to look pretty again after the long months of looking so dreadful!

As she sat rocking the baby and humming to herself, she heard the
sound of hooves coming up the side street and, peering curiously
through the tangle of dead vines on the porch, she saw Rhett Butler
riding toward the house.

He had been away from Atlanta for months, since just after Gerald
died, since long before Ella Lorena was born.  She had missed him
but she now wished ardently that there was some way to avoid seeing
him.  In fact, the sight of his dark face brought a feeling of
guilty panic to her breast.  A matter in which Ashley was concerned
lay on her conscience and she did not wish to discuss it with
Rhett, but she knew he would force the discussion, no matter how
disinclined she might be.

He drew up at the gate and swung lightly to the ground and she
thought, staring nervously at him, that he looked just like an
illustration in a book Wade was always pestering her to read aloud.

"All he needs is earrings and a cutlass between his teeth," she
thought.  "Well, pirate or no, he's not going to cut my throat
today if I can help it."

As he came up the walk she called a greeting to him, summoning her
sweetest smile.  How lucky that she had on her new dress and the
becoming cap and looked so pretty!  As his eyes went swiftly over
her, she knew he thought her pretty, too.

"A new baby!  Why, Scarlett, this is a surprise!" he laughed,
leaning down to push the blanket away from Ella Lorena's small ugly
face.

"Don't be silly," she said, blushing.  "How are you, Rhett?  You've
been away a long time."

"So I have.  Let me hold the baby, Scarlett.  Oh, I know how to
hold babies.  I have many strange accomplishments.  Well, he
certainly looks like Frank.  All except the whiskers, but give him
time."

"I hope not.  It's a girl."

"A girl?  That's better still.  Boys are such nuisances.  Don't
ever have any more boys, Scarlett."

It was on the tip of her tongue to reply tartly that she never
intended to have any more babies, boys or girls, but she caught
herself in time and smiled, casting about quickly in her mind for
some topic of conversation that would put off the bad moment when
the subject she feared would come up for discussion.

"Did you have a nice trip, Rhett?  Where did you go this time?"

"Oh--Cuba--New Orleans--other places.  Here, Scarlett, take the
baby.  She's beginning to slobber and I can't get to my
handkerchief.  She's a fine baby, I'm sure, but she's wetting my
shirt bosom."

She took the child back into her lap and Rhett settled himself
lazily on the banister and took a cigar from a silver case.

"You are always going to New Orleans," she said and pouted a
little.  "And you never will tell me what you do there."

"I am a hard-working man, Scarlett, and perhaps my business takes
me there."

"Hard-working!  You!" she laughed impertinently.  "You never worked
in your life.  You're too lazy.  All you ever do is finance
Carpetbaggers in their thieving and take half the profits and bribe
Yankee officials to let you in on schemes to rob us taxpayers."

He threw back his head and laughed.

"And how you would love to have money enough to bribe officials, so
you could do likewise!"

"The very idea--"  She began to ruffle.

"But perhaps you will make enough money to get into bribery on a
large scale some day.  Maybe you'll get rich off those convicts you
leased."

"Oh," she said, a little disconcerted, "how did you find out about
my gang so soon?"

"I arrived last night and spent the evening in the Girl of the
Period Saloon, where one hears all the news of the town.  It's a
clearing house for gossip.  Better than a ladies' sewing circle.
Everyone told me that you'd leased a gang and put that little plug-
ugly, Gallegher, in charge to work them to death."

"That's a lie," she said angrily.  "He won't work them to death.
I'll see to that."

"Will you?"

"Of course I will!  How can you even insinuate such things?"

"Oh, I do beg your pardon, Mrs. Kennedy!  I know your motives are
always above reproach.  However, Johnnie Gallegher is a cold little
bully if I ever saw one.  Better watch him or you'll be having
trouble when the inspector comes around."

"You tend to your business and I'll tend to mine," she said
indignantly.  "And I don't want to talk about convicts any more.
Everybody's been hateful about them.  My gang is my own business--
And you haven't told me yet what you do in New Orleans.  You go
there so often that everybody says--"  She paused.  She had not
intended to say so much.

"What do they say?"

"Well--that you have a sweetheart there.  That you are going to get
married.  Are you, Rhett?"

She had been curious about this for so long that she could not
refrain from asking the point-blank question.  A queer little pang
of jealousy jabbed at her at the thought of Rhett getting married,
although why that should be she did not know.

His bland eyes grew suddenly alert and he caught her gaze and held
it until a little blush crept up into her cheeks.

"Would it matter much to you?"

"Well, I should hate to lose your friendship," she said primly and,
with an attempt at disinterestedness, bent down to pull the blanket
closer about Ella Lorena's head.

He laughed suddenly, shortly, and said:  "Look at me, Scarlett."

She looked up unwillingly, her blush deepening.

"You can tell your curious friends that when I marry it will be
because I couldn't get the woman I wanted in any other way.  And
I've never yet wanted a woman bad enough to marry her."

Now she was indeed confused and embarrassed, for she remembered the
night on this very porch during the siege when he had said:  "I am
not a marrying man" and casually suggested that she become his
mistress--remembered, too, the terrible day when he was in jail and
was shamed by the memory.  A slow malicious smile went over his
face as he read her eyes.

"But I will satisfy your vulgar curiosity since you ask such
pointed questions.  It isn't a sweetheart that takes me to New
Orleans.  It's a child, a little boy."

"A little boy!"  The shock of this unexpected information wiped out
her confusion.

"Yes, he is my legal ward and I am responsible for him.  He's in
school in New Orleans.  I go there frequently to see him."

"And take him presents?"  So, she thought, that's how he always
knows what kind of presents Wade likes!

"Yes," he said shortly, unwillingly.

"Well, I never!  Is he handsome?"

"Too handsome for his own good."

"Is he a nice little boy?"

"No.  He's a perfect hellion.  I wish he had never been born.  Boys
are troublesome creatures.  Is there anything else you'd like to
know?"

He looked suddenly angry and his brow was dark, as though he
already regretted speaking of the matter at all.

"Well, not if you don't want to tell me any more," she said
loftily, though she was burning for further information.  "But I
just can't see you in the role of a guardian," and she laughed,
hoping to disconcert him.

"No, I don't suppose you can.  Your vision is pretty limited."

He said no more and smoked his cigar in silence for a while.  She
cast about for some remark as rude as his but could think of none.

"I would appreciate it if you'd say nothing of this to anyone," he
said finally.  "Though I suppose that asking a woman to keep her
mouth shut is asking the impossible."

"I can keep a secret," she said with injured dignity.

"Can you?  It's nice to learn unsuspected things about friends.
Now, stop pouting, Scarlett.  I'm sorry I was rude but you deserved
it for prying.  Give me a smile and let's be pleasant for a minute
or two before I take up an unpleasant subject."

Oh, dear! she thought.  Now, he's going to talk about Ashley and
the mill! and she hastened to smile and show her dimple to divert
him.  "Where else did you go, Rhett?  You haven't been in New
Orleans all this time, have you?"

"No, for the last month I've been in Charleston.  My father died."

"Oh, I'm sorry."

"Don't be.  I'm sure he wasn't sorry to die, and I'm sure I'm not
sorry he's dead."

"Rhett, what a dreadful thing to say!"

"It would be much more dreadful if I pretended to be sorry, when I
wasn't, wouldn't it?  There was never any love lost between us.  I
cannot remember when the old gentleman did not disapprove of me.  I
was too much like his own father and he disapproved heartily of his
father.  And as I grew older his disapproval of me became downright
dislike, which, I admit, I did little to change.  All the things
Father wanted me to do and be were such boring things.  And finally
he threw me out into the world without a cent and no training
whatsoever to be anything but a Charleston gentleman, a good pistol
shot and an excellent poker player.  And he seemed to take it as a
personal affront that I did not starve but put my poker playing to
excellent advantage and supported myself royally by gambling.  He
was so affronted at a Butler becoming a gambler that when I came
home for the first time, he forbade my mother to see me.  And all
during the war when I was blockading out of Charleston, Mother had
to lie and slip off to see me.  Naturally that didn't increase my
love for him."

"Oh, I didn't know all that!"

"He was what is pointed out as a fine old gentleman of the old
school which means that he was ignorant, thick headed, intolerant
and incapable of thinking along any lines except what other
gentlemen of the old school thought.  Everyone admired him
tremendously for having cut me off and counted me as dead.  'If thy
right eye offend thee, pluck it out.'  I was his right eye, his
oldest son, and he plucked me out with a vengeance."

He smiled a little, his eyes hard with amused memory.

"Well, I could forgive all that but I can't forgive what he's done
to Mother and my sister since the war ended.  They've been
practically destitute.  The plantation house was burned and the
rice fields have gone back to marsh lands.  And the town house went
for taxes and they've been living in two rooms that aren't fit for
darkies.  I've sent money to Mother, but Father has sent it back--
tainted money, you see!--and several times I've gone to Charleston
and given money, on the sly, to my sister.  But Father always found
out and raised merry hell with her, till her life wasn't worth
living, poor girl.  And back the money came to me.  I don't know
how they've lived. . . .  Yes, I do know.  My brother's given what
he could, though he hasn't much to give and he won't take anything
from me either--speculator's money is unlucky money, you see!  And
the charity of their friends.  Your Aunt Eulalie, she's been very
kind.  She's one of Mother's best friends, you know.  She's given
them clothes and--  Good God!  My mother on charity!"

It was one of the few times she had ever seen him with his mask
off, his face hard with honest hatred for his father and distress
for his mother.

"Aunt 'Lalie!  But, good Heavens, Rhett, she hasn't got anything
much above what I send her!"

"Ah, so that's where it comes from!  How ill bred of you, my dear,
to brag of such a thing in the face of my humiliation.  You must
let me reimburse you!"

"With pleasure," said Scarlett, her mouth suddenly twisting into a
grin, and he smiled back.

"Ah, Scarlett, how the thought of a dollar does make your eyes
sparkle!  Are you sure you haven't some Scotch or perhaps Jewish
blood as well as Irish?"

"Don't be hateful!  I didn't mean to throw it in your face about
Aunt 'Lalie.  But honestly, she thinks I'm made of money.  She's
always writing me for more and, God knows, I've got enough on my
hands without supporting all of Charleston.  What did your father
die of?"

"Genteel starvation, I think--and hope.  It served him right.  He
was willing to let Mother and Rosemary starve with him.  Now that
he's dead, I can help them.  I've bought them a house on the
Battery and they've servants to look after them.  But of course,
they couldn't let it be known that the money came from me."

"Why not?"

"My dear, surely you know Charleston!  You've visited there.  My
family may be poor but they have a position to uphold.  And they
couldn't uphold it if it were known that gambling money and
speculator's money and Carpetbag money was behind it.  No, they
gave it out that Father left an enormous life insurance--that he'd
beggared himself and starved himself to death to keep up the
payments, so that after he died, they'd be provided for.  So he is
looked upon as an even greater gentleman of the old school than
before. . . .  In fact, a martyr to his family.  I hope he's
turning in his grave at the knowledge that Mother and Rosemary are
comfortable now, in spite of his efforts. . . .  In a way, I'm
sorry he's dead because he wanted to die--was so glad to die."

"Why?"

"Oh, he really died when Lee surrendered.  You know the type.  He
never could adjust himself to the new times and spent his time
talking about the good old days."

"Rhett, are all old folks like that?"  She was thinking of Gerald
and what Will had said about him.

"Heavens, no!  Just look at your Uncle Henry and that old wild cat,
Mr. Merriwether, just to name two.  They took a new lease on life
when they marched out with the Home Guard and it seems to me that
they've gotten younger and more peppery ever since.  I met old man
Merriwether this morning driving Rene's pie wagon and cursing the
horse like an army mule skinner.  He told me he felt ten years
younger since he escaped from the house and his daughter-in-law's
coddling and took to driving the wagon.  And your Uncle Henry
enjoys fighting the Yankees in court and out and defending the
widow and the orphan--free of charge, I fear--against the
Carpetbaggers.  If there hadn't been a war, he'd have retired long
ago and nursed his rheumatism.  They're young again because they
are of use again and feel that they are needed.  And they like this
new day that gives old men another chance.  But there are plenty of
people, young people, who feel like my father and your father.
They can't and won't adjust and that brings me to the unpleasant
subject I want to discuss with you, Scarlett."

His sudden shift so disconcerted her that she stammered:  "What--
what--" and inwardly groaned:  "Oh, Lord!  Now, it's coming.  I
wonder if I can butter him down?"

"I shouldn't have expected either truth or honor or fair dealing
from you, knowing you as I do.  But foolishly, I trusted you."

"I don't know what you mean."

"I think you do.  At any rate, you look very guilty.  As I was
riding along Ivy Street a while ago, on my way to call on you, who
should hail me from behind a hedge but Mrs. Ashley Wilkes!  Of
course, I stopped and chatted with her."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, we had an enjoyable talk.  She told me she had always wanted
to let me know how brave she thought I was to have struck a blow
for the Confederacy, even at the eleventh hour."

"Oh, fiddle-dee-dee!  Melly's a fool.  She might have died that
night because you acted so heroic."

"I imagine she would have thought her life given in a good cause.
And when I asked her what she was doing in Atlanta she looked quite
surprised at my ignorance and told me that they were living here
now and that you had been kind enough to make Mr. Wilkes a partner
in your mill."

"Well, what of it?" questioned Scarlett, shortly.

"When I lent you the money to buy that mill I made one stipulation,
to which you agreed, and that was that it should not go to the
support of Ashley Wilkes."

"You are being very offensive.  I've paid you back your money and I
own the mill and what I do with it is my own business."

"Would you mind telling me how you made the money to pay back my
loan?"

"I made it selling lumber, of course."

"You made it with the money I lent you to give you your start.
That's what you mean.  My money is being used to support Ashley.
You are a woman quite without honor and if you hadn't repaid my
loan, I'd take great pleasure in calling it in now and selling you
out at public auction if you couldn't pay."

He spoke lightly but there was anger flickering in his eyes.

Scarlett hastily carried the warfare into the enemy's territory.

"Why do you hate Ashley so much?  I believe you're jealous of him."

After she had spoken she could have bitten her tongue, for he threw
back his head and laughed until she went red with mortification.

"Add conceit to dishonor," he said.  "You'll never get over being
the belle of the County, will you?  You'll always think you're the
cutest little trick in shoe leather and that every man you meet is
expiring for love of you."

"I don't either!" she cried hotly.  "But I just can't see why you
hate Ashley so much and that's the only explanation I can think
of."

"Well, think something else, pretty charmer, for that's the wrong
explanation.  And as for hating Ashley--I don't hate him any more
than I like him.  In fact, my only emotion toward him and his kind
is pity."

"Pity?"

"Yes, and a little contempt.  Now, swell up like a gobbler and tell
me that he is worth a thousand blackguards like me and that I
shouldn't dare to be so presumptuous as to feel either pity or
contempt for him.  And when you have finished swelling, I'll tell
you what I mean, if you're interested."

"Well, I'm not."

"I shall tell you, just the same, for I can't bear for you to go on
nursing your pleasant delusion of my jealousy.  I pity him because
he ought to be dead and he isn't.  And I have a contempt for him
because he doesn't know what to do with himself now that his world
is gone."

There was something familiar in the idea he expressed.  She had a
confused memory of having heard similar words but she could not
remember when and where.  She did not think very hard about it for
her anger was hot.

"If you had your way all the decent men in the South would be
dead!"

"And if they had their way, I think Ashley's kind would prefer to
be dead.  Dead with neat stones above them, saying:  'Here lies a
soldier of the Confederacy, dead for the Southland' or 'Dulce et
decorum est--' or any of the other popular epitaphs."

"I don't see why!"

"You never see anything that isn't written in letters a foot high
and then shoved under your nose, do you?  If they were dead, their
troubles would be over, there'd be no problems to face, problems
that have no solutions.  Moreover, their families would be proud of
them through countless generations.  And I've heard the dead are
happy.  Do you suppose Ashley Wilkes is happy?"

"Why, of course--" she began and then she remembered the look in
Ashley's eyes recently and stopped.

"Is he happy or Hugh Elsing or Dr. Meade?  Any more than my father
and your father were happy?"

"Well, perhaps not as happy as they might be, because they've all
lost their money."

He laughed.

"It isn't losing their money, my pet.  I tell you it's losing their
world--the world they were raised in.  They're like fish out of
water or cats with wings.  They were raised to be certain persons,
to do certain things, to occupy certain niches.  And those persons
and things and niches disappeared forever when General Lee arrived
at Appomattox.  Oh, Scarlett, don't look so stupid!  What is there
for Ashley Wilkes to do, now that his home is gone and his
plantation taken up for taxes and fine gentlemen are going twenty
for a penny?  Can he work with his head or his hands?  I'll bet
you've lost money hand over fist since he took over that mill."

"I have not!"

"How nice.  May I look over your books some Sunday evening when you
are at leisure?"

"You can go to the devil and not at your leisure.  You can go now,
for all I care."

"My pet, I've been to the devil and he's a very dull fellow.  I
won't go there again, even for you. . . .  You took my money when
you needed it desperately and you used it.  We had an agreement as
to how it should be used and you have broken that agreement.  Just
remember, my precious little cheat, the time will come when you
will want to borrow more money from me.  You'll want me to bank
you, at some incredibly low interest, so you can buy more mills and
more mules and build more saloons.  And you can whistle for the
money."

"When I need money I'll borrow it from the bank, thank you," she
said coldly, but her breast was heaving with rage.

"Will you?  Try to do it.  I own plenty of stock in the bank."

"You do?"

"Yes, I am interested in some honest enterprises."

"There are other banks--"

"Plenty of them.  And if I can manage it, you'll play hell getting
a cent from any of them.  You can go to the Carpetbag usurers if
you want money."

"I'll go to them with pleasure."

"You'll go but with little pleasure when you learn their rates of
interest.  My pretty, there are penalties in the business world for
crooked dealing.  You should have played straight with me."

"You're a fine man, aren't you?  So rich and powerful yet picking
on people who are down, like Ashley and me!"

"Don't put yourself in his class.  You aren't down.  Nothing will
down you.  But he is down and he'll stay there unless there's some
energetic person behind him, guiding and protecting him as long as
he lives.  I'm of no mind to have my money used for the benefit of
such a person."

"You didn't mind helping me and I was down and--"

"You were a good risk, my dear, an interesting risk.  Why?  Because
you didn't plump yourself down on your male relatives and sob for
the old days.  You got out and hustled and now your fortunes are
firmly planted on money stolen from a dead man's wallet and money
stolen from the Confederacy.  You've got murder to your credit, and
husband stealing, attempted fornication, lying and sharp dealing
and any amount of chicanery that won't bear close inspection.
Admirable things, all of them.  They show you to be a person of
energy and determination and a good money risk.  It's entertaining,
helping people who help themselves.  I'd lend ten thousand dollars
without even a note to that old Roman matron, Mrs. Merriwether.
She started with a basket of pies and look at her now!  A bakery
employing half a dozen people, old Grandpa happy with his delivery
wagon and that lazy little Creole, Rene, working hard and liking
it. . . .  Or that poor devil, Tommy Wellburn, who does two men's
work with half a man's body and does it well or--well, I won't go
on and bore you."

"You do bore me.  You bore me to distraction," said Scarlett
coldly, hoping to annoy him and divert him from the ever-
unfortunate subject of Ashley.  But he only laughed shortly and
refused to take up the gauntlet.

"People like them are worth helping.  But Ashley Wilkes--bah!  His
breed is of no use or value in an upside-down world like ours.
Whenever the world up-ends, his kind is the first to perish.  And
why not?  They don't deserve to survive because they won't fight--
don't know how to fight.  This isn't the first time the world's
been upside down and it won't be the last.  It's happened before
and it'll happen again.  And when it does happen, everyone loses
everything and everyone is equal.  And then they all start again at
taw, with nothing at all.  That is, nothing except the cunning of
their brains and strength of their hands.  But some people, like
Ashley, have neither cunning nor strength or, having them, scruple
to use them.  And so they go under and they should go under.  It's
a natural law and the world is better off without them.  But there
are always a hardy few who come through and given time, they are
right back where they were before the world turned over."

"You've been poor!  You just said that your father turned you out
without a penny!" said Scarlett, furious.  "I should think you'd
understand and sympathize with Ashley!"

"I do understand," said Rhett, "but I'm damned if I sympathize.
After the surrender Ashley had much more than I had when I was
thrown out.  At least, he had friends who took him in, whereas I
was Ishmael.  But what has Ashley done with himself?"

"If you are comparing him with yourself, you conceited thing, why--
He's not like you, thank God!  He wouldn't soil his hands as you
do, making money with Carpetbaggers and Scallawags and Yankees.
He's scrupulous and honorable!"

"But not too scrupulous and honorable to take aid and money from a
woman."

"What else could he have done?"

"Who am I to say?  I only know what I did, both when I was thrown
out and nowadays.  I only know what other men have done.  We saw
opportunity in the ruin of a civilization and we made the most of
our opportunity, some honestly, some shadily, and we are still
making the most of it.  But the Ashleys of this world have the same
chances and don't take them.  They just aren't smart, Scarlett, and
only the smart deserve to survive."

She hardly heard what he was saying, for now there was coming back
to her the exact memory which had teased her a few minutes before
when he first began speaking.  She remembered the cold wind that
swept the orchard of Tara and Ashley standing by a pile of rails,
his eyes looking beyond her.  And he had said--what?  Some funny
foreign name that sounded like profanity and had talked of the end
of the world.  She had not known what he meant then but now
bewildered comprehension was coming to her and with it a sick,
weary feeling.

"Why, Ashley said--"

"Yes?"

"Once at Tara he said something about the--a--dusk of the gods and
about the end of the world and some such foolishness."

"Ah, the Gotterdammerung!"  Rhett's eyes were sharp with interest.
"And what else?"

"Oh, I don't remember exactly.  I wasn't paying much mind.  But--
yes--something about the strong coming through and the weak being
winnowed out."

"Ah, so he knows.  Then that makes it harder for him.  Most of them
don't know and will never know.  They'll wonder all their lives
where the lost enchantment has vanished.  They'll simply suffer in
proud and incompetent silence.  But he understands.  He knows he's
winnowed out."

"Oh, he isn't!  Not while I've got breath in my body."

He looked at her quietly and his brown face was smooth.

"Scarlett, how did you manage to get his consent to come to Atlanta
and take over the mill?  Did he struggle very hard against you?"

She had a quick memory of the scene with Ashley after Gerald's
funeral and put it from her.

"Why, of course not," she replied indignantly.  "When I explained
to him that I needed his help because I didn't trust that scamp who
was running the mill and Frank was too busy to help me and I was
going to--well, there was Ella Lorena, you see.  He was very glad
to help me out."

"Sweet are the uses of motherhood!  So that's how you got around
him.  Well, you've got him where you want him now, poor devil, as
shackled to you by obligations as any of your convicts are by their
chains.  And I wish you both joy.  But, as I said at the beginning
of this discussion, you'll never get another cent out of me for any
of your little unladylike schemes, my double-dealing lady."

She was smarting with anger and with disappointment as well.  For
some time she had been planning to borrow more money from Rhett to
buy a lot downtown and start a lumber yard there.

"I can do without your money," she cried.  "I'm making money out of
Johnnie Gallegher's mill, plenty of it, now that I don't use free
darkies and I have some money out on mortgages and we are coining
cash at the store from the darky trade."

"Yes, so I heard.  How clever of you to rook the helpless and the
widow and the orphan and the ignorant!  But if you must steal,
Scarlett, why not steal from the rich and strong instead of the
poor and weak?  From Robin Hood on down to now, that's been
considered highly moral."

"Because," said Scarlett shortly, "it's a sight easier and safer to
steal--as you call it--from the poor."

He laughed silently, his shoulders shaking.

"You're a fine honest rogue, Scarlett!"

A rogue!  Queer that that term should hurt.  She wasn't a rogue,
she told herself vehemently.  At least, that wasn't what she wanted
to be.  She wanted to be a great lady.  For a moment her mind went
swiftly down the years and she saw her mother, moving with a sweet
swish of skirts and a faint fragrance of sachet, her small busy
hands tireless in the service of others, loved, respected,
cherished.  And suddenly her heart was sick.

"If you are trying to devil me," she said tiredly, "it's no use.  I
know I'm not as--scrupulous as I should be these days.  Not as kind
and as pleasant as I was brought up to be.  But I can't help it,
Rhett.  Truly, I can't.  What else could I have done?  What would
have happened to me, to Wade, to Tara and all of us if I'd been--
gentle when that Yankee came to Tara?  I should have been--but I
don't even want to think of that.  And when Jonas Wilkerson was
going to take the home place, suppose I'd been--kind and
scrupulous?  Where would we all be now?  And if I'd been sweet and
simple minded and not nagged Frank about bad debts we'd--oh, well.
Maybe I am a rogue, but I won't be a rogue forever, Rhett.  But
during these past years--and even now--what else could I have done?
How else could I have acted?  I've felt that I was trying to row a
heavily loaded boat in a storm.  I've had so much trouble just
trying to keep afloat that I couldn't be bothered about things that
didn't matter, things I could part with easily and not miss, like
good manners and--well, things like that.  I've been too afraid my
boat would be swamped and so I've dumped overboard the things that
seemed least important."

"Pride and honor and truth and virtue and kindliness," he
enumerated silkily.  "You are right, Scarlett.  They aren't
important when a boat is sinking.  But look around you at your
friends.  Either they are bringing their boats ashore safely with
cargoes intact or they are content to go down with all flags
flying."

"They are a passel of fools," she said shortly.  "There's a time
for all things.  When I've got plenty of money, I'll be nice as you
please, too.  Butter won't melt in my mouth.  I can afford to be
then."

"You can afford to be--but you won't.  It's hard to salvage
jettisoned cargo and, if it is retrieved, it's usually irreparably
damaged.  And I fear that when you can afford to fish up the honor
and virtue and kindness you've thrown overboard, you'll find they
have suffered a sea change and not, I fear, into something rich and
strange. . . ."

He rose suddenly and picked up his hat.

"You are going?"

"Yes.  Aren't you relieved?  I leave you to what remains of your
conscience."

He paused and looked down at the baby, putting out a finger for the
child to grip.

"I suppose Frank is bursting with pride?"

"Oh, of course."

"Has a lot of plans for this baby, I suppose?"

"Oh, well, you know how silly men are about their babies."

"Then, tell him," said Rhett and stopped short, an odd look on his
face, "tell him if he wants to see his plans for his child work
out, he'd better stay home at night more often than he's doing."

"What do you mean?"

"Just what I say.  Tell him to stay home."

"Oh, you vile creature!  To insinuate that poor Frank would--"

"Oh, good Lord!"  Rhett broke into a roar of laughter.  "I didn't
mean he was running around with women!  Frank!  Oh, good Lord!"

He went down the steps still laughing.



CHAPTER XLIV


The march afternoon was windy and cold, and Scarlett pulled the lap
robe high under her arms as she drove out the Decatur road toward
Johnnie Gallegher's mill.  Driving alone was hazardous these days
and she knew it, more hazardous than ever before, for now the
negroes were completely out of hand.  As Ashley had prophesied,
there had been hell to pay since the legislature refused to ratify
the amendment.  The stout refusal had been like a slap in the face
of the furious North and retaliation had come swiftly.  The North
was determined to force the negro vote on the state and, to this
end, Georgia had been declared in rebellion and put under the
strictest martial law.  Georgia's very existence as a state had
been wiped out and it had become, with Florida and Alabama,
"Military District Number Three," under the command of a Federal
general.

If life had been insecure and frightening before this, it was
doubly so now.  The military regulations which had seemed so
stringent the year before were now mild by comparison with the ones
issued by General Pope.  Confronted with the prospect of negro
rule, the future seemed dark and hopeless, and the embittered state
smarted and writhed helplessly.  As for the negroes, their new
importance went to their heads, and, realizing that they had the
Yankee Army behind them, their outrages increased.  No one was safe
from them.

In this wild and fearful time, Scarlett was frightened--frightened
but determined, and she still made her rounds alone, with Frank's
pistol tucked in the upholstery of the buggy.  She silently cursed
the legislature for bringing this worse disaster upon them all.
What good had it done, this fine brave stand, this gesture which
everyone called gallant?  It had just made matters so much worse.

As she drew near the path that led down through the bare trees into
the creek bottom where the Shantytown settlement was, she clucked
to the horse to quicken his speed.  She always felt uneasy driving
past this dirty, sordid cluster of discarded army tents and slave
cabins.  It had the worst reputation of any spot in or near
Atlanta, for here lived in filth outcast negroes, black prostitutes
and a scattering of poor whites of the lowest order.  It was
rumored to be the refuge of negro and white criminals and was the
first place the Yankee soldiers searched when they wanted a man.
Shootings and cuttings went on here with such regularity that the
authorities seldom troubled to investigate and generally left the
Shantytowners to settle their own dark affairs.  Back in the woods
there was a still that manufactured a cheap quality of corn whisky
and, by night, the cabins in the creek bottoms resounded with
drunken yells and curses.

Even the Yankees admitted that it was a plague spot and should be
wiped out, but they took no steps in this direction.  Indignation
was loud among the inhabitants of Atlanta and Decatur who were
forced to use the road for travel between the two towns.  Men went
by Shantytown with their pistols loosened in their holsters and
nice women never willingly passed it, even under the protection of
their men, for usually there were drunken negro slatterns sitting
along the road, hurling insults and shouting coarse words.

As long as she had Archie beside her, Scarlett had not given
Shantytown a thought, because not even the most impudent negro
woman dared laugh in her presence.  But since she had been forced
to drive alone, there had been any number of annoying, maddening
incidents.  The negro sluts seemed to try themselves whenever she
drove by.  There was nothing she could do except ignore them and
boil with rage.  She could not even take comfort in airing her
troubles to her neighbors or family because the neighbors would say
triumphantly:  "Well, what else did you expect?"  And her family
would take on dreadfully again and try to stop her.  And she had no
intention of stopping her trips.

Thank Heaven, there were no ragged women along the roadside today!
As she passed the trail leading down to the settlement she looked
with distaste at the group of shacks squatting in the hollow in the
dreary slant of the afternoon sun.  There was a chill wind blowing,
and as she passed there came to her nose the mingled smells of wood
smoke, frying pork and untended privies.  Averting her nose, she
flapped the reins smartly across the horse's back and hurried him
past and around the bend of the road.

Just as she was beginning to draw a breath of relief, her heart
rose in her throat with sudden fright, for a huge negro slipped
silently from behind a large oak tree.  She was frightened but not
enough to lose her wits and, in an instant, the horse was pulled up
and she had Frank's pistol in her hand.

"What do you want?" she cried with all the sternness she could
muster.  The big negro ducked back behind the oak, and the voice
that answered was frightened.

"Lawd, Miss Scarlett, doan shoot Big Sam!"

Big Sam!  For a moment she could not take in his words.  Big Sam,
the foreman of Tara whom she had seen last in the days of the
siege.  What on earth . . .

"Come out of there and let me see if you are really Sam!"

Reluctantly he slid out of his hiding place, a giant ragged figure,
bare-footed, clad in denim breeches and a blue Union uniform jacket
that was far too short and tight for his big frame.  When she saw
it was really Big Sam, she shoved the pistol down into the
upholstery and smiled with pleasure.

"Oh, Sam!  How nice to see you!"

Sam galloped over to the buggy, his eyes rolling with joy and his
white teeth flashing, and clutched her outstretched hand with two
black hands as big as hams.  His watermelon-pink tongue lapped out,
his whole body wiggled and his joyful contortions were as ludicrous
as the gambolings of a mastiff.

"Mah Lawd, it sho is good ter see some of de fambly agin!" he
cried, scrunching her hand until she felt that the bones would
crack.  "Hucoome you got so mean lak, totin' a gun, Miss Scarlett?"

"So many mean folks these days, Sam, that I have to tote it.  What
on earth are you doing in a nasty place like Shantytown, you, a
respectable darky?  And why haven't you been into town to see me?"

"Law'm, Miss Scarlett, ah doan lib in Shantytown.  Ah jes' bidin'
hyah fer a spell.  Ah wouldn' lib in dat place for nuthin'.  Ah
nebber in mah life seed sech trashy niggers.  An' Ah din' know you
wuz in 'Lanta.  Ah thought you wuz at Tara.  Ah wuz aimin' ter come
home ter Tara soon as Ah got de chance."

"Have you been living in Atlanta ever since the siege?"

"No, Ma'm!  Ah been trabelin'!"  He released her hand and she
painfully flexed it to see if the bones were intact.  "'Member w'en
you seed me las'?"

Scarlett remembered the hot day before the siege began when she and
Rhett had sat in the carriage and the gang of negroes with Big Sam
at their head had marched down the dusty street toward the
entrenchments singing "Go Down, Moses."  She nodded.

"Wel, Ah wuked lak a dawg diggin' bresswuks an' fillin' San' bags,
tell de Confedruts lef' 'Lanta.  De cap'n gempmum whut had me in
charge, he wuz kilt an' dar warn't nobody ter tell Big Sam whut ter
do, so Ah jes' lay low in de bushes.  Ah thought Ah'd try ter git
home ter Tara, but den Ah hear dat all de country roun' Tara done
buhnt up.  'Sides, Ah din' hab no way ter git back an' Ah wuz
sceered de patterollers pick me up, kase Ah din' hab no pass.  Den
de Yankees come in an' a Yankee gempmum, he wuz a cunnel, he tek a
shine ter me an' he keep me te ten' ter his hawse an' his boots.

"Yas, Ma'm!  Ah sho did feel bigitty, bein' a body serbant lak
Poke, w'en Ah ain' nuthin' but a fe'el han'.  Ah ain' tell de
Cunnel Ah wuz a fe'el han' an' he--  Well, Miss Scarlett, Yankees
is iggerunt folks!  He din' know de diffunce!  So Ah stayed wid him
an' Ah went ter Sabannah wid him w'en Gin'ul Sherman went dar, an'
fo' Gawd, Miss Scarlett, Ah nebber seed sech awful goin'-ons as Ah
seed on de way ter Sabannah!  A-stealin' an' a-buhnin'--did dey
buhn Tara, Miss Scarlett?"

"They set fire to it, but we put it out."

"Well'm, Ah sho glad ter hear dat.  Tara mah home an' Ah is aimin'
ter go back dar.  An' w'en de wah ober, de Cunnel he say ter me:
'You Sam!  You come on back Nawth wid me.  Ah pay you good wages.'
Well'm, lak all de niggers, Ah wuz honin' ter try disyere freedom
fo' Ah went home, so Ah goes Nawth wid de Cunnel.  Yas'm, us went
ter Washington an' Noo Yawk an' den ter Bawston whar de Cunnel lib.
Yas, Ma'am, Ah's a trabeled nigger!  Miss Scarlett, dar's mo'
hawses and cah'iges on dem Yankee streets dan you kin shake a stick
at!  Ah wuz sceered all de time Ah wuz gwine git runned ober!"

"Did you like it up North, Sam?"

Sam scratched his woolly head.

"Ah did--an' Ah din't.  De Cunnel, he a mighty fine man an' he
unnerstan' niggers.  But his wife, she sumpin' else.  His wife, she
call me 'Mister' fust time she seed me.  Yas'm, she do dat an' Ah
lak ter drap in mah tracks w'en she do it.  De Cunnel, he tell her
ter call me 'Sam' an' den she do it.  But all dem Yankee folks,
fust time dey meet me, dey call me 'Mist' O'Hara.'  An' dey ast me
ter set down wid dem, lak Ah wuz jes' as good as dey wuz.  Well, Ah
ain' nebber set down wid w'ite folks an' Ah is too ole ter learn.
Dey treat me lak Ah jes' as good as dey wuz, Miss Scarlett, but in
dere hearts, dey din' lak me--dey din' lak no niggers.  An' dey wuz
sceered of me, kase Ah's so big.  An' dey wuz allus astin' me 'bout
de blood houn's dat chase me an' de beatin's Ah got.  An', Lawd,
Miss Scarlett, Ah ain' nebber got no beatin's!  You know Mist'
Gerald ain' gwine let nobody beat a 'spensive nigger lak me!

"W'en Ah tell dem dat an' tell dem how good Miss Ellen ter de
niggers, an' how she set up a whole week wid me w'en Ah had de
pneumony, dey doan b'lieve me.  An', Miss Scarlett, Ah got ter
honin' fer Miss Ellen an' Tara, tell it look lak Ah kain stan' it
no longer, an' one night Ah lit out fer home, an' Ah rid de freight
cabs all de way down ter 'Lanta.  Ef you buy me a ticket ter Tara,
Ah sho be glad ter git home.  Ah sho be glad ter see Miss Ellen and
Mist' Gerald agin.  An done had nuff freedom.  Ah wants somebody
ter feed me good vittles reg'lar, and tell me whut ter do an' whut
not ter do, an' look affer me w'en Ah gits sick.  S'pose Ah gits de
pneumony agin?  Is dat Yankee lady gwine tek keer of me?  No, Ma'm!
She gwine call me 'Mist' O'Hara' but she ain' gwine nuss me.  But
Miss Ellen, she gwine nuss me, do Ah git sick an'--whut's de
mattuh, Miss Scarlett?"

"Pa and Mother are both dead, Sam."

"Daid?  Is you funnin' wid me, Miss Scarlett?  Dat ain' no way ter
treat me!"

"I'm not funning.  It's true.  Mother died when Sherman men came
through Tara and Pa--he went last June.  Oh, Sam, don't cry.
Please don't!  If you do, I'll cry too.  Sam, don't!  I just can't
stand it.  Let's don't talk about it now.  I'll tell you all about
it some other time. . . .  Miss Suellen is at Tara and she's
married to a mighty fine man, Mr. Will Benteen.  And Miss Carreen,
she's in a--"  Scarlett paused.  She could never make plain to the
weeping giant what a convent was.  "She's living in Charleston now.
But Pork and Prissy are at Tara. . . .  There, Sam, wipe your nose.
Do you really want to go home?"

"Yas'm but it ain' gwine be lak Ah thought wid Miss Ellen an'--"

"Sam, how'd you like to stay here in Atlanta and work for me?  I
need a driver and I need one bad with so many mean folks around
these days."

"Yas'm. You sho do.  Ah been aimin' ter say you ain' got no bizness
drivin' 'round by yo'seff, Miss Scarlett.  You ain' got no notion
how mean some niggers is dese days, specially dem whut live hyah in
Shantytown.  It ain' safe fer you.  Ah ain' been in Shantytown but
two days, but Ah hear dem talk 'bout you.  An' yesterday w'en you
druv by an' dem trashy black wenches holler at you, Ah recernize
you but you went by so fas' Ah couldn' ketch you.  But Ah sho tan
de hides of dem niggers!  Ah sho did.  Ain' you notice dar ain'
none of dem roun' hyah terday?"

"I did notice and I certainly thank you, Sam.  Well, how would you
like to be my carriage man?"

"Miss Scarlett, thankee, Ma'm, but Ah specs Ah better go ter Tara."

Big Sam looked down and his bare toe traced aimless marks in the
road.  There was a furtive uneasiness about him.

"Now, why?  I'll pay you good wages.  You must stay with me."

The big black face, stupid and as easily read as a child's, looked
up at her and there was fear in it.  He came closer and, leaning
over the side of the buggy, whispered:

"Miss Scarlett, Ah got ter git outer 'Lanta.  Ah got ter git ter
Tara whar dey woan fine me.  Ah--Ah done kilt a man."

"A darky?"

"No'm.  A w'ite man.  A Yankee sojer and dey's lookin' fer me.  Dat
de reason Ah'm hyah at Shantytown."

"How did it happen?"

"He wuz drunk an' he said sumpin' Ah couldn' tek noways an' Ah got
mah han's on his neck--an' Ah din' mean ter kill him, Miss
Scarlett, but mah han's is pow'ful strong, an' fo' Ah knowed it, he
wuz kilt.  An' Ah wuz so sceered Ah din' know whut ter do!  So Ah
come out hyah ter hide an' w'en Ah seed you go by yestiddy, Ah says
'Bress Gawd!  Dar Miss Scarlett!  She tek keer of me.  She ain'
gwine let de Yankees git me.  She sen' me back ter Tara."

"You say they're after you?  They know you did it?"

"Yas'm, Ah's so big dar ain' no mistakin' me.  Ah spec Ah's de
bigges' nigger in 'Lanta.  Dey done been out hyah already affer me
las' night but a nigger gal, she hid me in a cabe ober in de woods,
tell dey wuz gone."

Scarlett sat frowning for a moment.  She was not in the least
alarmed or distressed that Sam had committed murder, but she was
disappointed that she could not have him as a driver.  A big negro
like Sam would be as good a bodyguard as Archie.  Well, she must
get him safe to Tara somehow, for of course the authorities must
not get him.  He was too valuable a darky to be hanged.  Why, he
was the best foreman Tara had ever had!  It did not enter
Scarlett's mind that he was free.  He still belonged to her, like
Pork and Mammy and Peter and Cookie and Prissy.  He was still "one
of our family" and, as such, must be protected.

"I'll send you to Tara tonight," she said finally.  "Now Sam, I've
got to drive out the road a piece, but I ought to be back here
before sundown.  You be waiting here for me when I come back.
Don't tell anyone where you are going and if you've got a hat,
bring it along to hide your face."

"Ah ain' got no hat."

"Well, here's a quarter.  You buy a hat from one of those shanty
darkies and meet me here."

"Yas'm."  His face glowed with relief at once more having someone
to tell him what to do.

Scarlett drove on thoughtfully.  Will would certainly welcome a
good field hand at Tara.  Pork had never been any good in the
fields and never would be any good.  With Sam on the place, Pork
could come to Atlanta and join Dilcey as she had promised him when
Gerald died.

When she reached the mill the sun was setting and it was later than
she cared to be out.  Johnnie Gallegher was standing in the doorway
of the miserable shack that served as cook room for the little
lumber camp.  Sitting on a log in front of the slab-sided shack
that was their sleeping quarters were four of the five convicts
Scarlett had apportioned to Johnnie's mill.  Their convict uniforms
were dirty and foul with sweat, shackles clanked between their
ankles when they moved tiredly, and there was an air of apathy and
despair about them.  They were a thin, unwholesome lot, Scarlett
thought, peering sharply at them, and when she had leased them, so
short a time before, they were an upstanding crew.  They did not
even raise their eyes as she dismounted from the buggy but Johnnie
turned toward her, carelessly dragging off his hat.  His little
brown face was as hard as a nut as he greeted her.

"I don't like the look of the men," she said abruptly.  "They don't
look well.  Where's the other one?"

"Says he's sick," said Johnnie laconically.  "He's in the bunk
house."

"What ails him?"

"Laziness, mostly."

"I'll go see him."

"Don't do that.  He's probably nekkid.  I'll tend to him.  He'll be
back at work tomorrow."

Scarlett hesitated and saw one of the convicts raise a weary head
and give Johnnie a stare of intense hatred before he looked at the
ground again.

"Have you been whipping these men?"

"Now, Mrs. Kennedy, begging your pardon, who's running this mill?
You put me in charge and told me to run it.  You said I'd have a
free hand.  You ain't got no complaints to make of me, have you?
Ain't I making twice as much for you as Mr. Elsing did?"

"Yes, you are," said Scarlett, but a shiver went over her, like a
goose walking across her grave.

There was something sinister about this camp with its ugly shacks,
something which had not been here when Hugh Elsing had it.  There
was a loneliness, an isolation, about it that chilled her.  These
convicts were so far away from everything, so completely at the
mercy of Johnnie Gallegher, and if he chose to whip them or
otherwise mistreat them, she would probably never know about it.
The convicts would be afraid to complain to her for fear of worse
punishment after she was gone.

"The men look thin.  Are you giving them enough to eat?  God knows,
I spend enough money on their food to make them fat as hogs.  The
flour and pork alone cost thirty dollars last month.  What are you
giving them for supper?"

She stepped over to the cook shack and looked in.  A fat mulatto
woman, who was leaning over a rusty old stove, dropped a half
curtsy as she saw Scarlett and went on stirring a pot in which
black-eyed peas were cooking.  Scarlett knew Johnnie Gallegher
lived with her but thought it best to ignore the fact.  She saw
that except for the peas and a pan of corn pone there was no other
food being prepared.

"Haven't you got anything else for these men?"

"No'm."

"Haven't you got any side meat in these peas?"

"No'm."

"No boiling bacon in the peas?  But black-eyed peas are no good
without bacon.  There's no strength to them.  Why isn't there any
bacon?"

"Mist' Johnnie, he say dar ain' no use puttin' in no side meat."

"You'll put bacon in.  Where do you keep your supplies?"

The negro woman rolled frightened eyes toward the small closet that
served as a pantry and Scarlett threw the door open.  There was an
open barrel of cornmeal on the floor, a small sack of flour, a
pound of coffee, a little sugar, a gallon jug of sorghum and two
hams.  One of the hams sitting on the shelf had been recently
cooked and only one or two slices had been cut from it.  Scarlett
turned in a fury on Johnnie Gallegher and met his coldly angry
gaze.

"Where are the five sacks of white flour I sent out last week?  And
the sugar sack and the coffee?  And I had five hams sent and ten
pounds of side meat and God knows how many bushels of yams and
Irish potatoes.  Well, where are they?  You can't have used them
all in a week if you fed the men five meals a day.  You've sold
them!  That's what you've done, you thief!  Sold my good supplies
and put the money in your pocket and fed these men on dried peas
and corn pone.  No wonder they look so thin.  Get out of the way."

She stormed past him to the doorway.

"You, man, there on the end--yes, you!  Come here!"

The man rose and walked awkwardly toward her, his shackles
clanking, and she saw that his bare ankles were red and raw from
the chafing of the iron.

"When did you last have ham?"

The man looked down at the ground.

"Speak up."

Still the man stood silent and abject.  Finally he raised his eyes,
looked Scarlett in the face imploringly and dropped his gaze again.

"Scared to talk, eh?  Well, go in the pantry and get that ham off
the shelf.  Rebecca, give him your knife.  Take it out to those men
and divide it up.  Rebecca, make some biscuits and coffee for the
men.  And serve plenty of sorghum.  Start now, so I can see you do
it."

"Dat's Mist' Johnnie's privut flour an' coffee," Rebecca muttered
frightenedly.

"Mr. Johnnie's, my foot!  I suppose it's his private ham too.  You
do what I say.  Get busy.  Johnnie Gallegher, come out to the buggy
with me."

She stalked across the littered yard and climbed into the buggy,
noticing with grim satisfaction that the men were tearing at the
ham and cramming bits into their mouths voraciously.  They looked
as if they feared it would be taken from them at any minute.

"You are a rare scoundrel!" she cried furiously to Johnnie as he
stood at the wheel, his hat pushed back from his lowering brow.
"And you can just hand over to me the price of my supplies.  In the
future, I'll bring you provisions every day instead of ordering
them by the month.  Then you can't cheat me."

"In the future I won't be here," said Johnnie Gallegher.

"You mean you are quitting!"

For a moment it was on Scarlett's hot tongue to cry:  "Go and good
riddance!" but the cool hand of caution stopped her.  If Johnnie
should quit, what would she do?  He had been doubling the amount of
lumber Hugh turned out.  And just now she had a big order, the
biggest she had ever had and a rush order at that.  She had to get
that lumber into Atlanta.  If Johnnie quit, whom would she get to
take over the mill?

"Yes, I'm quitting.  You put me in complete charge here and you
told me that all you expected of me was as much lumber as I could
possibly get out.  You didn't tell me how to run my business then
and I'm not aiming to have you start now.  How I get the lumber out
is no affair of yours.  You can't complain that I've fallen down on
my bargain.  I've made money for you and I've earned my salary--and
what I could pick up on the side, too.  And here you come out here,
interfering, asking questions and breaking my authority in front of
the men.  How can you expect me to keep discipline after this?
What if the men do get an occasional lick?  The lazy scum deserve
worse.  What if they ain't fed up and pampered?  They don't deserve
nothing better.  Either you tend to your business and let me tend
to mine or I quit tonight."

His hard little face looked flintier than ever and Scarlett was in
a quandary.  If he quit tonight, what would she do?  She couldn't
stay here all night guarding the convicts!

Something of her dilemma showed in her eyes for Johnnie's
expression changed subtly and some of the hardness went out of his
face.  There was an easy agreeable note in his voice when he spoke.

"It's getting late, Mrs. Kennedy, and you'd better be getting on
home.  We ain't going to fall out over a little thing like this,
are we?  S'pose you take ten dollars out of my next month's wages
and let's call it square."

Scarlett's eyes went unwillingly to the miserable group gnawing on
the ham and she thought of the sick man lying in the windy shack.
She ought to get rid of Johnnie Gallegher.  He was a thief and a
brutal man.  There was no telling what he did to the convicts when
she wasn't there.  But, on the other hand, he was smart and, God
knows, she needed a smart man.  Well, she couldn't part with him
now.  He was making money for her.  She'd just have to see to it
that the convicts got their proper rations in the future.

"I'll take twenty dollars out of your wages," she said shortly,
"and I'll be back and discuss the matter further in the morning."

She picked up the reins.  But she knew there would be no further
discussion.  She knew that the matter had ended there and she knew
Johnnie knew it.

As she drove off down the path to the Decatur road her conscience
battled with her desire for money.  She knew she had no business
exposing human lives to the hard little man's mercies.  If he
should cause the death of one of them she would be as guilty as he
was, for she had kept him in charge after learning of his
brutalities.  But, on the other hand--well, on the other hand, men
had no business getting to be convicts.  If they broke laws and got
caught, then they deserved what they got.  This partly salved her
conscience but as she drove down the road the dull thin faces of
the convicts would keep coming back into her mind.

"Oh, I'll think of them later," she decided, and pushed the thought
into the lumber room of her mind and shut the door upon it.



The sun had completely gone when she reached the bend in the road
above Shantytown and the woods about her were dark.  With the
disappearance of the sun, a bitter chill had fallen on the twilight
world and a cold wind blew through the dark woods, making the bare
boughs crack and the dead leaves rustle.  She had never been out
this late by herself and she was uneasy and wished herself home.

Big Sam was nowhere to be seen and, as she drew rein to wait for
him, she worried about his absence, fearing the Yankees might have
already picked him up.  Then she heard footsteps coming up the path
from the settlement and a sigh of relief went through her lips.
She'd certainly dress Sam down for keeping her waiting.

But it wasn't Sam who came round the bend.

It was a big ragged white man and a squat black negro with
shoulders and chest like a gorilla.  Swiftly she flapped the reins
on the horse's back and clutched the pistol.  The horse started to
trot and suddenly shied as the white man threw up his hand.

"Lady," he said, "can you give me a quarter?  I'm sure hungry."

"Get out of the way," she answered, keeping her voice as steady as
she could.  "I haven't got any money.  Giddap."

With a sudden swift movement the man's hand was on the horse's
bridle.

"Grab her!" he shouted to the negro.  "She's probably got her money
in her bosom!"

What happened next was like a nightmare to Scarlett, and it all
happened so quickly.  She brought up her pistol swiftly and some
instinct told her not to fire at the white man for fear of shooting
the horse.  As the negro came running to the buggy, his black face
twisted in a leering grin, she fired point-blank at him.  Whether
or not she hit him, she never knew, but the next minute the pistol
was wrenched from her hand by a grasp that almost broke her wrist.
The negro was beside her, so close that she could smell the rank
odor of him as he tried to drag her over the buggy side.  With her
one free hand she fought madly, clawing at his face, and then she
felt his big hand at her throat and, with a ripping noise, her
basque was torn open from neck to waist.  Then the black hand
fumbled between her breasts, and terror and revulsion such as she
had never known came over her and she screamed like an insane
woman.

"Shut her up!  Drag her out!" cried the white man, and the black
hand fumbled across Scarlett's face to her mouth.  She bit as
savagely as she could and then screamed again, and through her
screaming she heard the white man swear and realized that there was
a third man in the dark road.  The black hand dropped from her
mouth and the negro leaped away as Big Sam charged at him.

"Run, Miss Scarlett!" yelled Sam, grappling with the negro; and
Scarlett, shaking and screaming, clutched up the reins and whip and
laid them both over the horse.  It went off at a jump and she felt
the wheels pass over something soft, something resistant.  It was
the white man who lay in the road where Sam had knocked him down.

Maddened by terror, she lashed the horse again and again and it
struck a gait that made the buggy rock and sway.  Through her
terror she was conscious of the sound of feet running behind her
and she screamed at the horse to go faster.  If that black ape got
her again, she would die before he even got his hands upon her.

A voice yelled behind her:  "Miss Scarlett!  Stop!"

Without slacking, she looked trembling over her shoulder and saw
Big Sam racing down the road behind her, his long legs working like
hard-driven pistons.  She drew rein as he came up and he flung
himself into the buggy, his big body crowding her to one side.
Sweat and blood were streaming down his face as he panted:

"Is you hu't?  Did dey hu't you?"

She could not speak, but seeing the direction of his eyes and their
quick averting, she realized that her basque was open to the waist
and her bare bosom and corset cover were showing.  With a shaking
hand she clutched the two edges together and bowing her head began
to cry in terrified sobs.

"Gimme dem lines," said Sam, snatching the reins from her.  "Hawse,
mek tracks!"

The whip cracked and the startled horse went off at a wild gallop
that threatened to throw the buggy into the ditch.

"Ah hope Ah done kill dat black baboon.  But Ah din' wait ter fine
out," he panted.  "But ef he hahmed you, Miss Scarlett, Ah'll go
back an' mek sho of it."

"No--no--drive on quickly," she sobbed.



CHAPTER XLV


That night when Frank deposited her and Aunt Pitty and the children
at Melanie's and rode off down the street with Ashley, Scarlett
could have burst with rage and hurt.  How could he go off to a
political meeting on this of all nights in the world?  A political
meeting!  And on the same night when she had been attacked, when
anything might have happened to her!  It was unfeeling and selfish
of him.  But then, he had taken the whole affair with maddening
calm, ever since Sam had carried her sobbing into the house, her
basque gaping to the waist.  He hadn't clawed his beard even once
when she cried out her story.  He had just questioned gently:
"Sugar, are you hurt--or just scared?"

Wrath mingling with her tears she had been unable to answer and Sam
had volunteered that she was just scared.

"Ah got dar fo' dey done mo'n t'ar her dress."

"You're a good boy, Sam, and I won't forget what you've done.  If
there's anything I can do for you--"

"Yassah, you kin sen' me ter Tara, quick as you kin.  De Yankees is
affer me."

Frank had listened to this statement calmly too, and had asked no
questions.  He had looked very much as he did the night Tony came
beating on their door, as though this was an exclusively masculine
affair and one to be handled with a minimum of words and emotions.

"You go get in the buggy.  I'll have Peter drive you as far as
Rough and Ready tonight and you can hide in the woods till morning
and then catch the train to Jonesboro.  It'll be safer. . . .  Now,
Sugar, stop crying.  It's all over now and you aren't really hurt.
Miss Pitty, could I have your smelling salts?  And Mammy, fetch
Miss Scarlett a glass of wine."

Scarlett had burst into renewed tears, this time tears of rage.
She wanted comforting, indignation, threats of vengeance.  She
would even have preferred him storming at her, saying that this was
just what he had warned her would happen--anything rather than have
him take it all so casually and treat her danger as a matter of
small moment.  He was nice and gentle, of course, but in an absent
way as if he had something far more important on his mind.

And that important thing had turned out to be a small political
meeting!

She could hardly believe her ears when he told her to change her
dress and get ready for him to escort her over to Melanie's for the
evening.  He must know how harrowing her experience had been, must
know she did not want to spend an evening at Melanie's when her
tired body and jangled nerves cried out for the warm relaxation of
bed and blankets--with a hot brick to make her toes tingle and a
hot toddy to soothe her fears.  If he really loved her, nothing
could have forced him from her side on this of all nights.  He
would have stayed home and held her hand and told her over and over
that he would have died if anything had happened to her.  And when
he came home tonight and she had him alone, she would certainly
tell him so.

Melanie's small parlor looked as serene as it usually did on nights
when Frank and Ashley were away and the women gathered together to
sew.  The room was warm and cheerful in the firelight.  The lamp on
the table shed a quiet yellow glow on the four smooth heads bent to
their needlework.  Four skirts billowed modestly, eight small feet
were daintily placed on low hassocks.  The quiet breathing of Wade,
Ella and Beau came through the open door of the nursery.  Archie
sat on a stool by the hearth, his back against the fireplace, his
cheek distended with tobacco, whittling industriously on a bit of
wood.  The contrast between the dirty, hairy old man and the four
neat, fastidious ladies was as great as though he were a grizzled,
vicious old watchdog and they four small kittens.

Melanie's soft voice, tinged with indignation, went on and on as
she told of the recent outburst of temperament on the part of the
Lady Harpists.  Unable to agree with the Gentlemen's Glee Club as
to the program for their next recital, the ladies had waited on
Melanie that afternoon and announced their intention of withdrawing
completely from the Musical Circle.  It had taken all of Melanie's
diplomacy to persuade them to defer their decision.

Scarlett, overwrought, could have screamed:  "Oh, damn the Lady
Harpists!"  She wanted to talk about her dreadful experience.  She
was bursting to relate it in detail, so she could ease her own
fright by frightening the others.  She wanted to tell how brave she
had been, just to assure herself by the sound of her own words that
she had, indeed, been brave.  But every time she brought up the
subject, Melanie deftly steered the conversation into other and
innocuous channels.  This irritated Scarlett almost beyond
endurance.  They were as mean as Frank.

How could they be so calm and placid when she had just escaped so
terrible a fate?  They weren't even displaying common courtesy in
denying her the relief of talking about it.

The events of the afternoon had shaken her more than she cared to
admit, even to herself.  Every time she thought of that malignant
black face peering at her from the shadows of the twilight forest
road, she fell to trembling.  When she thought of the black hand at
her bosom and what would have happened if Big Sam had not appeared,
she bent her head lower and squeezed her eyes tightly shut.  The
longer she sat silent in the peaceful room, trying to sew,
listening to Melanie's voice, the tighter her nerves stretched.
She felt that at any moment she would actually hear them break with
the same pinging sound a banjo string makes when it snaps.

Archie's whittling annoyed her and she frowned at him.  Suddenly it
seemed odd that he should be sitting there occupying himself with a
piece of wood.  Usually he lay flat on the sofa, during the
evenings when he was on guard, and slept and snored so violently
that his long beard leaped into the air with each rumbling breath.
It was odder still that neither Melanie nor India hinted to him
that he should spread a paper on the floor to catch his litter of
shavings.  He had already made a perfect mess on the hearth rug but
they did not seem to have noticed it.

While she watched him, Archie turned suddenly toward the fire and
spat a stream of tobacco juice on it with such vehemence that
India, Melanie and Pitty leaped as though a bomb had exploded.

"NEED you expectorate so loudly?" cried India in a voice that
cracked with nervous annoyance.  Scarlett looked at her in surprise
for India was always so self-contained.

Archie gave her look for look.

"I reckon I do," he answered coldly and spat again.  Melanie gave a
little frowning glance at India.

"I was always so glad dear Papa didn't chew," began Pitty, and
Melanie, her frown creasing deeper, swung on her and spoke sharper
words than Scarlett had ever heard her speak.

"Oh, do hush, Auntie!  You're so tactless."

"Oh, dear!"  Pitty dropped her sewing in her lap and her mouth
pressed up in hurt.  "I declare, I don't know what ails you all
tonight.  You and India are just as jumpy and cross as two old
sticks."

No one answered her.  Melanie did not even apologize for her
crossness but went back to her sewing with small violence.

"You're taking stitches an inch long," declared Pitty with some
satisfaction.  "You'll have to take every one of them out.  What's
the matter with you?"

But Melanie still did not answer.

Was there anything the matter with them, Scarlett wondered?  Had
she been too absorbed with her own fears to notice?  Yes, despite
Melanie's attempts to make the evening appear like any one of fifty
they had all spent together, there was a difference due to their
alarm and shock at what had happened that afternoon.  Scarlett
stole glances at her companions and intercepted a look from India.
It discomforted her because it was a long, measuring glance that
carried in its cold depths something stronger than hate, something
more insulting than contempt.

"As though she thought I was to blame for what happened," Scarlett
thought indignantly.

India turned from her to Archie and, all annoyance at him gone from
her face, gave him a look of veiled anxious inquiry.  But he did
not meet her eyes.  He did however look at Scarlett, staring at her
in the same cold hard way India had done.

Silence fell dully in the room as Melanie did not take up the
conversation again and, in the silence, Scarlett heard the rising
wind outside.  It suddenly began to be a most unpleasant evening.
Now she began to feel the tension in the air and she wondered if it
had been present all during the evening--and she too upset to
notice it.  About Archie's face there was an alert waiting look and
his tufted, hairy old ears seemed pricked up like a lynx's.  There
was a severely repressed uneasiness about Melanie and India that
made them raise their heads from their sewing at each sound of
hooves in the road, at each groan of bare branches under the
wailing wind, at each scuffing sound of dry leaves tumbling across
the lawn.  They started at each soft snap of burning logs on the
hearth as if they were stealthy footsteps.

Something was wrong and Scarlett wondered what it was.  Something
was afoot and she did not know about it.  A glance at Aunt Pitty's
plump guileless face, screwed up in a pout, told her that the old
lady was as ignorant as she.  But Archie and Melanie and India
knew.  In the silence she could almost feel the thoughts of India
and Melanie whirling as madly as squirrels in a cage.  They knew
something, were waiting for something, despite their efforts to
make things appear as usual.  And their inner unease communicated
itself to Scarlett, making her more nervous than before.  Handling
her needle awkwardly, she jabbed it into her thumb and with a
little scream of pain and annoyance that made them all jump, she
squeezed it until a bright red drop appeared.

"I'm just too nervous to sew," she declared, throwing her mending
to the floor.  "I'm nervous enough to scream.  I want to go home
and go to bed.  And Frank knew it and he oughtn't to have gone out.
He talks, talks, talks about protecting women against darkies and
Carpetbaggers and when the time comes for him to do some
protecting, where is he?  At home, taking care of me?  No, indeed,
he's gallivanting around with a lot of other men who don't do
anything but talk and--"

Her snapping eyes came to rest on India's face and she paused.
India was breathing fast and her pale lashless eyes were fastened
on Scarlett's face with a deadly coldness.

"If it won't pain you too much, India," she broke off sarcastically,
"I'd be much obliged if you'd tell me why you've been staring at me
all evening.  Has my face turned green or something?"

"It won't pain me to tell you.  I'll do it with pleasure," said
India and her eyes glittered.  "I hate to see you underrate a fine
man like Mr. Kennedy when, if you knew--"

"India!" said Melanie warningly, her hands clenching on her sewing.

"I think I know my husband better than you do," said Scarlett, the
prospect of a quarrel, the first open quarrel she had ever had with
India, making her spirits rise and her nervousness depart.
Melanie's eyes caught India's and reluctantly India closed her
lips.  But almost instantly she spoke again and her voice was cold
with hate.

"You make me sick, Scarlett O'Hara, talking about being protected!
You don't care about being protected!  If you did you'd never have
exposed yourself as you have done all these months, prissing
yourself about this town, showing yourself off to strange men,
hoping they'll admire you!  What happened to you this afternoon was
just what you deserved and if there was any justice you'd have
gotten worse."

"Oh, India, hush!" cried Melanie.

"Let her talk," cried Scarlett.  "I'm enjoying it.  I always knew
she hated me and she was too much of a hypocrite to admit it.  If
she thought anyone would admire her, she'd be walking the streets
naked from dawn till dark."

India was on her feet, her lean body quivering with insult.

"I do hate you," she said in a clear but trembling voice.  "But it
hasn't been hypocrisy that's kept me quiet.  It's something you
can't understand, not possessing any--any common courtesy, common
good breeding.  It's the realization that if all of us don't hang
together and submerge our own small hates, we can't expect to beat
the Yankees.  But you--you--you've done all you could to lower the
prestige of decent people--working and bringing shame on a good
husband, giving Yankees and riffraff the right to laugh at us and
make insulting remarks about our lack of gentility.  Yankees don't
know that you aren't one of us and have never been.  Yankees
haven't sense enough to know that you haven't any gentility.  And
when you've ridden about the woods exposing yourself to attack,
you've exposed every well-behaved woman in town to attack by
putting temptation in the ways of darkies and mean white trash.
And you've put our men folks' lives in danger because they've got
to--"

"My God, India!" cried Melanie and even in her wrath, Scarlett was
stunned to hear Melanie take the Lord's name in vain.  "You must
hush!  She doesn't know and she--you must hush!  You promised--"

"Oh, girls!" pleaded Miss Pittypat, her lips trembling.

"What don't I know?"  Scarlett was on her feet, furious, facing the
coldly blazing India and the imploring Melanie.

"Guinea hens," said Archie suddenly and his voice was contemptuous.
Before anyone could rebuke him, his grizzled head went up sharply
and he rose swiftly.  "Somebody comin' up the walk.  'Tain't Mr.
Wilkes neither.  Cease your cackle."

There was male authority in his voice and the women stood suddenly
silent, anger fading swiftly from their faces as he stumped across
the room to the door.

"Who's thar?" he questioned before the caller even knocked.

"Captain Butler.  Let me in."

Melanie was across the floor so swiftly that her hoops swayed up
violently, revealing her pantalets to the knees, and before Archie
could put his hand on the knob she flung the door open.  Rhett
Butler stood in the doorway, his black slouch hat low over his
eyes, the wild wind whipping his cape about him in snapping folds.
For once his good manners had deserted him.  He neither took off
his hat nor spoke to the others in the room.  He had eyes for no
one but Melanie and he spoke abruptly without greeting.

"Where have they gone?  Tell me quickly.  It's life or death."

Scarlett and Pitty, startled and bewildered, looked at each other
in wonderment and, like a lean old cat, India streaked across the
room to Melanie's side.

"Don't tell him anything," she cried swiftly.  "He's a spy, a
Scallawag!"

Rhett did not even favor her with a glance.

"Quickly, Mrs. Wilkes!  There may still be time."

Melanie seemed in a paralysis of terror and only stared into his
face.

"What on earth--" began Scarlett.

"Shet yore mouth," directed Archie briefly.  "You too, Miss Melly.
Git the hell out of here, you damned Scallawag."

"No, Archie, no!" cried Melanie and she put a shaking hand on
Rhett's arm as though to protect him from Archie.  "What has
happened?  How did--how did you know?"

On Rhett's dark face impatience fought with courtesy.

"Good God, Mrs. Wilkes, they've all been under suspicion since the
beginning--only they've been too clever--until tonight!  How do I
know?  I was playing poker tonight with two drunken Yankee captains
and they let it out.  The Yankees knew there'd be trouble tonight
and they've prepared for it.  The fools have walked into a trap."

For a moment it was as though Melanie swayed under the impact of a
heavy blow and Rhett's arm went around her waist to steady her.

"Don't tell him!  He's trying to trap you!" cried India, glaring at
Rhett.  "Didn't you hear him say he'd been with Yankee officers
tonight?"

Still Rhett did not look at her.  His eyes were bent insistently on
Melanie's white face.

"Tell me.  Where did they go?  Have they a meeting place?"

Despite her fear and incomprehension, Scarlett thought she had
never seen a blanker, more expressionless face than Rhett's but
evidently Melanie saw something else, something that made her give
her trust.  She straightened her small body away from the steadying
arm and said quietly but with a voice that shook:

"Out the Decatur road near Shantytown.  They meet in the cellar of
the old Sullivan plantation--the one that's half-burned."

"Thank you.  I'll ride fast.  When the Yankees come here, none of
you know anything."

He was gone so swiftly, his black cape melting into the night, that
they could hardly realize he had been there at all until they heard
the spattering of gravel and the mad pounding of a horse going off
at full gallop.

"The Yankees coming here?" cried Pitty and, her small feet turning
under her, she collapsed on the sofa, too frightened for tears.

"What's it all about?  What did he mean?  If you don't tell me I'll
go crazy!"  Scarlett laid hands on Melanie and shook her violently
as if by force she could shake an answer from her.

"Mean?  It means you've probably been the cause of Ashley's and Mr.
Kennedy's death!"  In spite of the agony of fear there was a note
of triumph in India's voice.  "Stop shaking Melly.  She's going to
faint."

"No, I'm not," whispered Melanie, clutching the back of a chair.

"My God, my God!  I don't understand!  Kill Ashley?  Please,
somebody tell me--"

Archie's voice, like a rusty hinge, cut through Scarlett's words.

"Set down," he ordered briefly.  "Pick up yore sewin'.  Sew like
nothin' had happened.  For all we know, the Yankees might have been
spyin' on this house since sundown.  Set down, I say, and sew."

Trembling they obeyed, even Pitty picking up a sock and holding it
in shaking fingers while her eyes, wide as a frightened child's
went around the circle for an explanation.

"Where is Ashley?  What has happened to him, Melly?" cried
Scarlett.

"Where's your husband?  Aren't you interested in him?"  India's
pale eyes blazed with insane malice as she crumpled and
straightened the torn towel she had been mending.

"India, please!"  Melanie had mastered her voice but her white,
shaken face and tortured eyes showed the strain under which she was
laboring.  "Scarlett, perhaps we should have told you but--but--you
had been through so much this afternoon that we--that Frank didn't
think--and you were always so outspoken against the Klan--"

"The Klan--"

At first, Scarlett spoke the word as if she had never heard it
before and had no comprehension of its meaning and then:

"The Klan!" she almost screamed it.  "Ashley isn't in the Klan!
Frank can't be!  Oh, he promised me!"

"Of course, Mr. Kennedy is in the Klan and Ashley, too, and all the
men we know," cried India.  "They are men, aren't they?  And white
men and Southerners.  You should have been proud of him instead of
making him sneak out as though it were something shameful and--"

"You all have known all along and I didn't--"

"We were afraid it would upset you," said Melanie sorrowfully.

"Then that's where they go when they're supposed to be at the
political meetings?  Oh, he promised me!  Now, the Yankees will
come and take my mills and the store and put him in jail--oh, what
did Rhett Butler mean?"

India's eyes met Melanie's in wild fear.  Scarlett rose, flinging
her sewing down.

"If you don't tell me, I'm going downtown and find out.  I'll ask
everybody I see until I find--"

"Set," said Archie, fixing her with his eye.  "I'll tell you.
Because you went gallivantin' this afternoon and got yoreself into
trouble through yore own fault, Mr. Wilkes and Mr. Kennedy and the
other men are out tonight to kill that thar nigger and that thar
white man, if they can catch them, and wipe out that whole
Shantytown settlement.  And if what that Scallawag said is true,
the Yankees suspected sumpin' or got wind somehow and they've sont
out troops to lay for them.  And our men have walked into a trap.
And if what Butler said warn't true, then he's a spy and he is
goin' to turn them up to the Yankees and they'll git kilt just the
same.  And if he does turn them up, then I'll kill him, if it's the
last deed of m' life.  And if they ain't kilt, then they'll all
have to light out of here for Texas and lay low and maybe never
come back.  It's all yore fault and thar's blood on yore hands."

Anger wiped out the fear from Melanie's face as she saw
comprehension come slowly across Scarlett's face and then horror
follow swiftly.  She rose and put her hand on Scarlett's shoulder.

"Another such word and you go out of this house, Archie," she said
sternly.  "It's not her fault.  She only did--did what she felt she
had to do.  And our men did what they felt they had to do.  People
must do what they must do.  We don't all think alike or act alike
and it's wrong to--to judge others by ourselves.  How can you and
India say such cruel things when her husband as well as mine may
be--may be--"

"Hark!" interrupted Archie softly.  "Set, Ma'm.  Thar's horses."

Melanie sank into a chair, picked up one of Ashley's shirts and,
bowing her head over it, unconsciously began to tear the frills
into small ribbons.

The sound of hooves grew louder as horses trotted up to the house.
There was the jangling of bits and the strain of leather and the
sound of voices.  As the hooves stopped in front of the house, one
voice rose above the others in a command and the listeners heard
feet going through the side yard toward the back porch.  They felt
that a thousand inimical eyes looked at them through the unshaded
front window and the four women, with fear in their hearts, bent
their heads and plied their needles.  Scarlett's heart screamed in
her breast:  "I've killed Ashley!  I've killed him!"  And in that
wild moment she did not even think that she might have killed Frank
too.  She had no room in her mind for any picture save that of
Ashley, lying at the feet of Yankee cavalrymen, his fair hair
dappled with blood.

As the harsh rapid knocking sounded at the door, she looked at
Melanie and saw come over the small, strained face a new
expression, an expression as blank as she had just seen on Rhett
Butler's face, the bland blank look of a poker player bluffing a
game with only two deuces.

"Archie, open the door," she said quietly.

Slipping his knife into his boot top and loosening the pistol in
his trouser band, Archie stumped over to the door and flung it
open.  Pitty gave a little squeak, like a mouse who feels the trap
snap down, as she saw massed in the doorway, a Yankee captain and a
squad of bluecoats.  But the others said nothing.  Scarlett saw
with the faintest feeling of relief that she knew this officer.  He
was Captain Tom Jaffery, one of Rhett's friends.  She had sold him
lumber to build his house.  She knew him to be a gentleman.
Perhaps, as he was a gentleman, he wouldn't drag them away to
prison.  He recognized her instantly and, taking off his hat,
bowed, somewhat embarrassed.

"Good evening, Mrs. Kennedy.  And which of you ladies is Mrs.
Wilkes?"

"I am Mrs. Wilkes," answered Melanie, rising and for all her
smallness, dignity flowed from her.  "And to what do I owe this
intrusion?"

The eyes of the captain flickered quickly about the room, resting
for an instant on each face, passing quickly from their faces to
the table and the hat rack as though looking for signs of male
occupancy.

"I should like to speak to Mr. Wilkes and Mr. Kennedy, if you
please."

"They are not here," said Melanie, a chill in her soft voice.

"Are you sure?"

"Don't you question Miz Wilkes' word," said Archie, his beard
bristling.

"I beg your pardon, Mrs. Wilkes.  I meant no disrespect.  If you
give me your word, I will not search the house."

"You have my word.  But search if you like.  They are at a meeting
downtown at Mr. Kennedy's store."

"They are not at the store.  There was no meeting tonight,"
answered the captain grimly.  "We will wait outside until they
return."

He bowed briefly and went out, closing the door behind him.  Those
in the house heard a sharp order, muffled by the wind:  "Surround
the house.  A man at each window and door."  There was a tramping
of feet.  Scarlett checked a start of terror as she dimly saw
bearded faces peering in the windows at them.  Melanie sat down and
with a hand that did not tremble reached for a book on the table.
It was a ragged copy of Les Miserables, that book which caught the
fancy of the Confederate soldiers.  They had read it by camp-fire
light and took some grim pleasure in calling it "Lee's Miserables."
She opened it at the middle and began to read in a clear monotonous
voice.

"Sew," commanded Archie in a hoarse whisper and the three women,
nerved by Melanie's cool voice, picked up their sewing and bowed
their heads.

How long Melanie read beneath that circle of watching eyes,
Scarlett never knew but it seemed hours.  She did not even hear a
word that Melanie read.  Now she was beginning to think of Frank as
well as Ashley.  So this was the explanation of his apparent calm
this evening!  He had promised her he would have nothing to do with
the Klan.  Oh, this was just the kind of trouble she had feared
would come upon them!  All the work of this last year would go for
nothing.  All her struggles and fears and labors in rain and cold
had been wasted.  And who would have thought that spiritless old
Frank would get himself mixed up in the hot-headed doings of the
Klan?  Even at this minute, he might be dead.  And if he wasn't
dead and the Yankees caught him, he'd be hanged.  And Ashley, too!

Her nails dug into her palms until four bright-red crescents
showed.  How could Melanie read on and on so calmly when Ashley was
in danger of being hanged?  When he might be dead?  But something
in the cool soft voice reading the sorrows of Jean Valjean steadied
her, kept her from leaping to her feet and screaming.

Her mind fled back to the night Tony Fontaine had come to them,
hunted, exhausted, without money.  If he had not reached their
house and received money and a fresh horse, he would have been
hanged long since.  If Frank and Ashley were not dead at this very
minute, they were in Tony's position, only worse.  With the house
surrounded by soldiers they couldn't come home and get money and
clothes without being captured.  And probably every house up and
down the street had a similar guard of Yankees, so they could not
apply to friends for aid.  Even now they might be riding wildly
through the night, bound for Texas.

But Rhett--perhaps Rhett had reached them in time.  Rhett always
had plenty of cash in his pocket.  Perhaps he would lend them
enough to see them through.  But that was queer.  Why should Rhett
bother himself about Ashley's safety?  Certainly he disliked him,
certainly he professed a contempt for him.  Then why--  But this
riddle was swallowed up in a renewed fear for the safety of Ashley
and Frank.

"Oh, it's all my fault!" she wailed to herself.  "India and Archie
spoke the truth.  It's all my fault.  But I never thought either of
them was foolish enough to join the Klan!  And I never thought
anything would really happen to me!  But I couldn't have done
otherwise.  Melly spoke the truth.  People have to do what they
have to do.  And I had to keep the mills going!  I had to have
money!  And now I'll probably lose it all and somehow it's all my
fault!"

After a long time Melanie's voice faltered, trailed off and was
silent.  She turned her head toward the window and stared as though
no Yankee soldier stared back from behind the glass.  The others
raised their heads, caught by her listening pose, and they too
listened.

There was a sound of horses' feet and of singing, deadened by the
closed windows and doors, borne away by the wind but still
recognizable.  It was the most hated and hateful of all songs, the
song about Sherman's men "Marching through Georgia" and Rhett
Butler was singing it.

Hardly had he finished the first lines when two other voices,
drunken voices, assailed him, enraged foolish voices that stumbled
over words and blurred them together.  There was a quick command
from Captain Jaffery on the front porch and the rapid tramp of
feet.  But even before these sounds arose, the ladies looked at one
another stunned.  For the drunken voices expostulating with Rhett
were those of Ashley and Hugh Elsing.

Voices rose louder on the front walk, Captain Jaffery's curt and
questioning, Hugh's shrill with foolish laughter, Rhett's deep and
reckless and Ashley's queer, unreal, shouting:  "What the hell!
What the hell!"

"That can't be Ashley!" thought Scarlett wildly.  "He never gets
drunk!  And Rhett--why, when Rhett's drunk he gets quieter and
quieter--never loud like that!"

Melanie rose and, with her, Archie rose.  They heard the captain's
sharp voice:  "These two men are under arrest."  And Archie's hand
closed over his pistol butt.

"No," whispered Melanie firmly.  "No.  Leave it to me."  There was
in her face the same look Scarlett had seen that day at Tara when
Melanie had stood at the top of the steps looking down at the dead
Yankee, her weak wrist weighed down by the heavy saber--a gentle
and timid soul nerved by circumstances to the caution and fury of a
tigress.  She threw the front door open.

"Bring him in, Captain Butler," she called in a clear tone that bit
with venom.  "I suppose you've gotten him intoxicated again.  Bring
him in."

From the dark windy walk, the Yankee captain spoke:  "I'm sorry,
Mrs. Wilkes, but your husband and Mr. Elsing are under arrest."

"Arrest?  For what?  For drunkenness?  If everyone in Atlanta was
arrested for drunkenness, the whole Yankee garrison would be in
jail continually.  Well, bring him in, Captain Butler--that is, if
you can walk yourself."

Scarlett's mind was not working quickly and for a brief moment
nothing made sense.  She knew neither Rhett nor Ashley was drunk
and she knew Melanie knew they were not drunk.  Yet here was
Melanie, usually so gentle and refined, screaming like a shrew and
in front of Yankees too, that both of them were too drunk to walk.

There was a short mumbled argument, punctuated with curses, and
uncertain feet ascended the stairs.  In the doorway appeared
Ashley, white faced, his head lolling, his bright hair tousled, his
long body wrapped from neck to knees in Rhett's black cape.  Hugh
Elsing and Rhett, none too steady on their feet, supported him on
either side and it was obvious he would have fallen to the floor
but for their aid.  Behind them came the Yankee captain, his face a
study of mingled suspicion and amusement.  He stood in the open
doorway with his men peering curiously over his shoulders and the
cold wind swept the house.

Scarlett, frightened, puzzled, glanced at Melanie and back to the
sagging Ashley and then half-comprehension came to her.  She
started to cry out:  "But he can't be drunk!" and bit back the
words.  She realized she was witnessing a play, a desperate play on
which lives hinged.  She knew she was not part of it nor was Aunt
Pitty but the others were and they were tossing cues to one another
like actors in an oft-rehearsed drama.  She understood only half
but she understood enough to keep silent.

"Put him in the chair," cried Melanie indignantly.  "And you,
Captain Butler, leave this house immediately!  How dare you show
your face here after getting him in this condition again!"

The two men eased Ashley into a rocker and Rhett, swaying, caught
hold of the back of the chair to steady himself and addressed the
captain with pain in his voice.

"That's fine thanks I get, isn't it?  For keeping the police from
getting him and bringing him home and him yelling and trying to
claw me!"

"And you, Hugh Elsing, I'm ashamed of you!  What will your poor
mother say?  Drunk and out with a--a Yankee-loving Scallawag like
Captain Butler!  And, oh, Mr. Wilkes, how could you do such a
thing?"

"Melly, I ain't so very drunk," mumbled Ashley, and with the words
fell forward and lay face down on the table, his head buried in his
arms.

"Archie, take him to his room and put him to bed--as usual,"
ordered Melanie.  "Aunt Pitty, please run and fix the bed and oo-
oh," she suddenly burst into tears.  "Oh, how could he?  After he
promised!"

Archie already had his arm under Ashley's shoulder and Pitty,
frightened and uncertain, was on her feet when the captain
interposed.

"Don't touch him.  He's under arrest.  Sergeant!"

As the sergeant stepped into the room, his rifle at trail, Rhett,
evidently trying to steady himself, put a hand on the captain's arm
and, with difficulty, focused his eyes.

"Tom, what you arresting him for?  He ain't so very drunk.  I've
seen him drunker."

"Drunk be damned," cried the captain.  "He can lie in the gutter
for all I care.  I'm no policeman.  He and Mr. Elsing are under
arrest for complicity in a Klan raid at Shantytown tonight.  A
nigger and a white man were killed.  Mr. Wilkes was the ringleader
in it."

"Tonight?"  Rhett began to laugh.  He laughed so hard that he sat
down on the sofa and put his head in his hands.  "Not tonight,
Tom," he said when he could speak.  "These two have been with me
tonight--ever since eight o'clock when they were supposed to be at
the meeting."

"With you, Rhett?  But--"  A frown came over the captain's forehead
and he looked uncertainly at the snoring Ashley and his weeping
wife.  "But--where were you?"

"I don't like to say," and Rhett shot a look of drunken cunning at
Melanie.

"You'd better say!"

"Le's go out on the porch and I'll tell you where we were."

"You'll tell me now."

"Hate to say it in front of ladies.  If you ladies'll step out of
the room--"

"I won't go," cried Melanie, dabbing angrily at her eyes with her
handkerchief.  "I have a right to know.  Where was my husband?"

"At Belle Watling's sporting house," said Rhett, looking abashed.
"He was there and Hugh and Frank Kennedy and Dr. Meade and--and a
whole lot of them.  Had a party.  Big party.  Champagne.  Girls--"

"At--at Belle Watling's?"

Melanie's voice rose until it cracked with such pain that all eyes
turned frightenedly to her.  Her hand went clutching at her bosom
and, before Archie could catch her, she had fainted.  Then a hubbub
ensued, Archie picking her up, India running to the kitchen for
water, Pitty and Scarlett fanning her and slapping her wrists,
while Hugh Elsing shouted over and over:  "Now you've done it!  Now
you've done it!"

"Now it'll be all over town," said Rhett savagely.  "I hope you're
satisfied, Tom.  There won't be a wife in Atlanta who'll speak to
her husband tomorrow."

"Rhett, I had no idea--"  Though the chill wind was blowing through
the open door on his back, the captain was perspiring.  "Look here!
You take an oath they were at--er--at Belle's?"

"Hell, yes," growled Rhett.  "Go ask Belle herself if you don't
believe me.  Now, let me carry Mrs. Wilkes to her room.  Give her
to me, Archie.  Yes, I can carry her.  Miss Pitty, go ahead with a
lamp."

He took Melanie's limp body from Archie's arms with ease.

"You get Mr. Wilkes to bed, Archie.  I don't want to ever lay eyes
or hands on him again after this night."

Pitty's hand trembled so that the lamp was a menace to the safety
of the house but she held it and trotted ahead toward the dark
bedroom.  Archie, with a grunt, got an arm under Ashley and raised
him.

"But--I've got to arrest these men!"

Rhett turned in the dim hallway.

"Arrest them in the morning then.  They can't run away in this
condition--and I never knew before that it was illegal to get drunk
in a sporting house.  Good God, Tom, there are fifty witnesses to
prove they were at Belle's."

"There are always fifty witnesses to prove a Southerner was
somewhere he wasn't," said the captain morosely.  "You come with
me, Mr. Elsing.  I'll parole Mr. Wilkes on the word of--"

"I am Mr. Wilkes' sister.  I will answer for his appearance," said
India coldly.  "Now, will you please go?  You've caused enough
trouble for one night."

"I regret it exceedingly."  The captain bowed awkwardly.  "I only
hope they can prove their presence at the--er--Miss--Mrs. Watling's
house.  Will you tell your brother that he must appear before the
provost marshal tomorrow morning for questioning?"

India bowed coldly and, putting her hand upon the door knob,
intimated silently that his speedy retirement would be welcome.
The captain and the sergeant backed out, Hugh Elsing with them, and
she slammed the door behind them.  Without even looking at
Scarlett, she went swiftly to each window and drew down the shade.
Scarlett, her knees shaking, caught hold of the chair in which
Ashley had been sitting to steady herself.  Looking down at it, she
saw that there was a dark moist spot, larger than her hand, on the
cushion in the back of the chair.  Puzzled, her hand went over it
and, to her horror, a sticky red wetness appeared on her palm.

"India," she whispered, "India, Ashley's--he's hurt."

"You fool!  Did you think he was really drunk?"

India snapped down the last shade and started on flying feet for
the bedroom, with Scarlett close behind her, her heart in her
throat.  Rhett's big body barred the doorway but, past his
shoulder, Scarlett saw Ashley lying white and still on the bed.
Melanie, strangely quick for one so recently in a faint, was
rapidly cutting off his blood-soaked shirt with embroidery
scissors.  Archie held the lamp low over the bed to give light and
one of his gnarled fingers was on Ashley's wrist.

"Is he dead?" cried both girls together.

"No, just fainted from loss of blood.  It's through his shoulder,"
said Rhett.

"Why did you bring him here, you fool?" cried India.  "Let me get
to him!  Let me pass!  Why did you bring him here to be arrested?"

"He was too weak to travel.  There was nowhere else to bring him,
Miss Wilkes.  Besides--do you want him to be an exile like Tony
Fontaine?  Do you want a dozen of your neighbors to live in Texas
under assumed names for the rest of their lives?  There's a chance
that we may get them all off if Belle--"

"Let me pass!"

"No, Miss Wilkes.  There's work for you.  You must go for a doctor--
Not Dr. Meade.  He's implicated in this and is probably explaining
to the Yankees at this very minute.  Get some other doctor.  Are you
afraid to go out alone at night?"

"No," said India, her pale eyes glittering.  "I'm not afraid."  She
caught up Melanie's hooded cape which was hanging on a hook in the
hall.  "I'll go for old Dr. Dean."  The excitement went out of her
voice as, with an effort, she forced calmness.  "I'm sorry I called
you a spy and a fool.  I did not understand.  I'm deeply grateful
for what you've done for Ashley--but I despise you just the same."

"I appreciate frankness--and I thank you for it."  Rhett bowed and
his lip curled down in an amused smile.  "Now, go quickly and by
back ways and when you return do not come in this house if you see
signs of soldiers about."

India shot one more quick anguished look at Ashley, and, wrapping
her cape about her, ran lightly down the hall to the back door and
let herself out quietly into the night.

Scarlett, straining her eyes past Rhett, felt her heart beat again
as she saw Ashley's eyes open.  Melanie snatched a folded towel
from the washstand rack and pressed it against his streaming
shoulder and he smiled up weakly, reassuringly into her face.
Scarlett felt Rhett's hard penetrating eyes upon her, knew that her
heart was plain upon her face, but she did not care.  Ashley was
bleeding, perhaps dying and she who loved him had torn that hole
through his shoulder.  She wanted to run to the bed, sink down
beside it and clasp him to her but her knees trembled so that she
could not enter the room.  Hand at her mouth, she stared while
Melanie packed a fresh towel against his shoulder, pressing it hard
as though she could force back the blood into his body.  But the
towel reddened as though by magic.

How could a man bleed so much and still live?  But, thank God,
there was no bubble of blood at his lips--oh, those frothy red
bubbles, forerunners of death that she knew so well from the
dreadful day of the battle at Peachtree Creek when the wounded had
died on Aunt Pitty's lawn with bloody mouths.

"Brace up," said Rhett, and there was a hard, faintly jeering note
in his voice.  "He won't die.  Now, go take the lamp and hold it
for Mrs. Wilkes.  I need Archie to run errands."

Archie looked across the lamp at Rhett.

"I ain't takin' no orders from you," he said briefly, shifting his
wad of tobacco to the other cheek.

"You do what he says," said Melanie sternly, "and do it quickly.
Do everything Captain Butler says.  Scarlett, take the lamp."

Scarlett went forward and took the lamp, holding it in both hands
to keep from dropping it.  Ashley's eyes had closed again.  His
bare chest heaved up slowly and sank quickly and the red stream
seeped from between Melanie's small frantic fingers.  Dimly she
heard Archie stump across the room to Rhett and heard Rhett's low
rapid words.  Her mind was so fixed upon Ashley that of the first
half-whispered words of Rhett, she only heard:  "Take my horse . . .
tied outside . . . ride like hell."

Archie mumbled some question and Scarlett heard Rhett reply:  "The
old Sullivan plantation.  You'll find the robes pushed up the
biggest chimney.  Burn them."

"Um," grunted Archie.

"And there's two--men in the cellar.  Pack them over the horse as
best you can and take them to that vacant lot behind Belle's--the
one between her house and the railroad tracks.  Be careful.  If
anyone sees you, you'll hang as well as the rest of us.  Put them
in that lot and put pistols near them--in their hands.  Here--take
mine."

Scarlett, looking across the room, saw Rhett reach under his coat
tails and produce two revolvers which Archie took and shoved into
his waist band.

"Fire one shot from each.  It's got to appear like a plain case of
shooting.  You understand?"

Archie nodded as if he understood perfectly and an unwilling gleam
of respect shone in his cold eye.  But understanding was far from
Scarlett.  The last half-hour had been so nightmarish that she felt
nothing would ever be plain and clear again.  However, Rhett seemed
in perfect command of the bewildering situation and that was a
small comfort.

Archie turned to go and then swung about and his one eye went
questioningly to Rhett's face.

"Him?"

"Yes."

Archie grunted and spat on the floor.

"Hell to pay," he said as he stumped down the hall to the back
door.

Something in the last low interchange of words made a new fear and
suspicion rise up in Scarlett's breast like a chill ever-swelling
bubble.  When that bubble broke--

"Where's Frank?" she cried.

Rhett came swiftly across the room to the bed, his big body
swinging as lightly and noiselessly as a cat's.

"All in good time," he said and smiled briefly.  "Steady that lamp,
Scarlett.  You don't want to burn Mr. Wilkes up.  Miss Melly--"

Melanie looked up like a good little soldier awaiting a command and
so tense was the situation it did not occur to her that for the
first time Rhett was calling her familiarly by the name which only
family and old friends used.

"I beg your pardon, I mean, Mrs. Wilkes. . . ."

"Oh, Captain Butler, do not ask my pardon!  I should feel honored
if you called me 'Melly' without the Miss!  I feel as though you
were my--my brother or--or my cousin.  How kind you are and how
clever!  How can I ever thank you enough?"

"Thank you," said Rhett and for a moment he looked almost
embarrassed.  "I should never presume so far, but Miss Melly," and
his voice was apologetic, "I'm sorry I had to say that Mr. Wilkes
was in Belle Watling's house.  I'm sorry to have involved him and
the others in such a--a--  But I had to think fast when I rode away
from here and that was the only plan that occurred to me.  I knew
my word would be accepted because I have so many friends among the
Yankee officers.  They do me the dubious honor of thinking me
almost one of them because they know my--shall we call it my
'unpopularity'?--among my townsmen.  And you see, I was playing
poker in Belle's bar earlier in the evening.  There are a dozen
Yankee soldiers who can testify to that.  And Belle and her girls
will gladly lie themselves black in the face and say Mr. Wilkes and
the others were--upstairs all evening.  And the Yankees will
believe them.  Yankees are queer that way.  It won't occur to them
that women of--their profession are capable of intense loyalty or
patriotism.  The Yankees wouldn't take the word of a single nice
Atlanta lady as to the whereabouts of the men who were supposed to
be at the meeting tonight but they will take the word of--fancy
ladies.  And I think that between the word of honor of a Scallawag
and a dozen fancy ladies, we may have a chance of getting the men
off."

There was a sardonic grin on his face at the last words but it
faded as Melanie turned up to him a face that blazed with
gratitude.

"Captain Butler, you are so smart!  I wouldn't have cared if you'd
said they were in hell itself tonight, if it saves them!  For I
know and every one else who matters knows that my husband was never
in a dreadful place like that!"

"Well--" began Rhett awkwardly, "as a matter of fact, he was at
Belle's tonight."

Melanie drew herself up coldly.

"You can never make me believe such a lie!"

"Please, Miss Melly!  Let me explain!  When I got out to the old
Sullivan place tonight, I found Mr. Wilkes wounded and with him
were Hugh Elsing and Dr. Meade and old man Merriwether--"

"Not the old gentleman!" cried Scarlett.

"Men are never too old to be fools.  And your Uncle Henry--"

"Oh, mercy!" cried Aunt Pitty.

"The others had scattered after the brush with the troops and the
crowd that stuck together had come to the Sullivan place to hide
their robes in the chimney and to see how badly Mr. Wilkes was
hurt.  But for his wound, they'd be headed for Texas by now--all of
them--but he couldn't ride far and they wouldn't leave him.  It was
necessary to prove that they had been somewhere instead of where
they had been, and so I took them by back ways to Belle Watling's."

"Oh--I see.  I do beg your pardon for my rudeness, Captain Butler.
I see now it was necessary to take them there but--  Oh, Captain
Butler, people must have seen you going in!"

"No one saw us.  We went in through a private back entrance that
opens on the railroad tracks.  It's always dark and locked."

"Then how--?"

"I have a key," said Rhett laconically, and his eyes met Melanie's
evenly.

As the full impact of the meaning smote her, Melanie became so
embarrassed that she fumbled with the bandage until it slid off the
wound entirely.

"I did not mean to pry--" she said in a muffled voice, her white
face reddening, as she hastily pressed the towel back into place.

"I regret having to tell a lady such a thing."

"Then it's true!" thought Scarlett with an odd pang.  "Then he does
live with that dreadful Watling creature!  He does own her house!"

"I saw Belle and explained to her.  We gave her a list of the men
who were out tonight and she and her girls will testify that they
were all in her house tonight.  Then to make our exit more
conspicuous, she called the two desperadoes who keep order at her
place and had us dragged downstairs, fighting, and through the
barroom and thrown out into the street as brawling drunks who were
disturbing the place."

He grinned reminiscently.  "Dr. Meade did not make a very
convincing drunk.  It hurt his dignity to even be in such a place.
But your Uncle Henry and old man Merriwether were excellent.  The
stage lost two great actors when they did not take up the drama.
They seemed to enjoy the affair.  I'm afraid your Uncle Henry has a
black eye due to Mr. Merriwether's zeal for his part.  He--"

The back door swung open and India entered, followed by old Dr.
Dean, his long white hair tumbled, his worn leather bag bulging
under his cape.  He nodded briefly but without words to those
present and quickly lifted the bandage from Ashley's shoulder.

"Too high for the lung," he said.  "If it hasn't splintered his
collar bone it's not so serious.  Get me plenty of towels, ladies,
and cotton if you have it, and some brandy."

Rhett took the lamp from Scarlett and set it on the table as
Melanie and India sped about, obeying the doctor's orders.

"You can't do anything here.  Come into the parlor by the fire."
He took her arm and propelled her from the room.  There was a
gentleness foreign to him in both hand and voice.  "You've had a
rotten day, haven't you?"

She allowed herself to be led into the front room and though she
stood on the hearth rug in front of the fire she began to shiver.
The bubble of suspicion in her breast was swelling larger now.  It
was more than a suspicion.  It was almost a certainty and a
terrible certainty.  She looked up into Rhett's immobile face and
for a moment she could not speak.  Then:

"Was Frank at--Belle Watling's?"

"No."

Rhett's voice was blunt.

"Archie's carrying him to the vacant lot near Belle's.  He's dead.
Shot through the head."



CHAPTER XLVI


Few families in the north end of town slept that night for the news
of the disaster to the Klan, and Rhett's stratagem spread swiftly
on silent feet as the shadowy form of India Wilkes slipped through
back yards, whispered urgently through kitchen doors and slipped
away into the windy darkness.  And in her path, she left fear and
desperate hope.

From without, houses looked black and silent and wrapped in sleep
but, within, voices whispered vehemently into the dawn.  Not only
those involved in the night's raid but every member of the Klan was
ready for flight and in almost every stable along Peachtree Street,
horses stood saddled in the darkness, pistols in holsters and food
in saddlebags.  All that prevented a wholesale exodus was India's
whispered message:  "Captain Butler says not to run.  The roads
will be watched.  He has arranged with that Watling creature--"  In
dark rooms men whispered:  "But why should I trust that damned
Scallawag Butler?  It may be a trap!"  And women's voices implored:
"Don't go!  If he saved Ashley and Hugh, he may save everybody.  If
India and Melanie trust him--"  And they half trusted and stayed
because there was no other course open to them.

Earlier in the night, the soldiers had knocked at a dozen doors and
those who could not or would not tell where they had been that
night were marched off under arrest.  Rene Picard and one of Mrs.
Merriwether's nephews and the Simmons boys and Andy Bonnell were
among those who spent the night in jail.  They had been in the ill-
starred foray but had separated from the others after the shooting.
Riding hard for home they were arrested before they learned of
Rhett's plan.  Fortunately they all replied, to questions, that
where they had been that night was their own business and not that
of any damned Yankees.  They had been locked up for further
questioning in the morning.  Old man Merriwether and Uncle Henry
Hamilton declared shamelessly that they had spent the evening at
Belle Watling's sporting house and when Captain Jaffery remarked
irritably that they were too old for such goings on, they wanted to
fight him.

Belle Watling herself answered Captain Jaffery's summons, and
before he could make known his mission she shouted that the house
was closed for the night.  A passel of quarrelsome drunks had
called in the early part of the evening and had fought one another,
torn the place up, broken her finest mirrors and so alarmed the
young ladies that all business had been suspended for the night.
But if Captain Jaffery wanted a drink; the bar was still open--

Captain Jaffery, acutely conscious of the grins of his men and
feeling helplessly that he was fighting a mist, declared angrily
that he wanted neither the young ladies nor a drink and demanded if
Belle knew the names of her destructive customers.  Oh, yes, Belle
knew them.  They were her regulars.  They came every Wednesday
night and called themselves the Wednesday Democrats, though what
they meant by that she neither knew or cared.  And if they didn't
pay for the damage to the mirrors in the upper hall, she was going
to have the law on them.  She kept a respectable house and--  Oh,
their names?  Belle unhesitatingly reeled off the names of twelve
under suspicion, Captain Jaffery smiled sourly.

"These damned Rebels are as efficiently organized as our Secret
Service," he said.  "You and your girls will have to appear before
the provost marshal tomorrow."

"Will the provost make them pay for my mirrors?"

"To hell with your mirrors!  Make Rhett Butler pay for them.  He
owns the place, doesn't he?"

Before dawn, every ex-Confederate family in town knew everything.
And their negroes, who had been told nothing, knew everything too,
by that black grapevine telegraph system which defies white
understanding.  Everyone knew the details of the raid, the killing
of Frank Kennedy and crippled Tommy Wellburn and how Ashley was
wounded in carrying Frank's body away.

Some of the feeling of bitter hatred the women bore Scarlett for
her share in the tragedy was mitigated by the knowledge that her
husband was dead and she knew it and could not admit it and have
the poor comfort of claiming his body.  Until morning light
disclosed the bodies and the authorities notified her, she must
know nothing.  Frank and Tommy, pistols in cold hands, lay
stiffening among the dead weeds in a vacant lot.  And the Yankees
would say they killed each other in a common drunken brawl over a
girl in Belle's house.  Sympathy ran high for Fanny, Tommy's wife,
who had just had a baby, but no one could slip through the darkness
to see her and comfort her because a squad of Yankees surrounded
the house, waiting for Tommy to return.  And there was another
squad about Aunt Pitty's house, waiting for Frank.

Before dawn the news had trickled about that the military inquiry
would take place that day.  The townspeople, heavy eyed from
sleeplessness and anxious waiting, knew that the safety of some of
their most prominent citizens rested on three things--the ability
of Ashley Wilkes to stand on his feet and appear before the
military board, as though he suffered nothing more serious than a
morning-after headache, the word of Belle Watling that these men
had been in her house all evening and the word of Rhett Butler that
he had been with them.

The town writhed at these last two!  Belle Watling!  To owe their
men's lives to her!  It was intolerable!  Women who had
ostentatiously crossed the street when they saw Belle coming,
wondered if she remembered and trembled for fear she did.  The men
felt less humiliation at taking their lives from Belle than the
women did, for many of them thought her a good sort.  But they were
stung that they must owe lives and freedom to Rhett Butler, a
speculator and a Scallawag.  Belle and Rhett, the town's best-known
fancy woman and the town's most hated man.  And they must be under
obligation to them.

Another thought that stung them to impotent wrath was the knowledge
that the Yankees and Carpetbaggers would laugh.  Oh, how they would
laugh!  Twelve of the town's most prominent citizens revealed as
habitual frequenters of Belle Watling's sporting house!  Two of
them killed in a fight over a cheap little girl, others ejected
from the place as too drunk to be tolerated even by Belle and some
under arrest, refusing to admit they were there when everyone knew
they were there!

Atlanta was right in fearing that the Yankees would laugh.  They
had squirmed too long beneath Southern coldness and contempt and
now they exploded with hilarity.  Officers woke comrades and
retailed the news.  Husbands roused wives at dawn and told them as
much as could be decently told to women.  And the women, dressing
hastily, knocked on their neighbors' doors and spread the story.
The Yankee ladies were charmed with it all and laughed until tears
ran down their faces.  This was Southern chivalry and gallantry for
you!  Maybe those women who carried their heads so high and snubbed
all attempts at friendliness wouldn't be so uppity, now that
everyone knew where their husbands spent their time when they were
supposed to be at political meetings.  Political meetings!  Well,
that was funny!

But even as they laughed, they expressed regret for Scarlett and
her tragedy.  After all, Scarlett was a lady and one of the few
ladies in Atlanta who were nice to Yankees.  She had already won
their sympathy by the fact that she had to work because her husband
couldn't or wouldn't support her properly.  Even though her husband
was a sorry one, it was dreadful that the poor thing should
discover he had been untrue to her.  And it was doubly dreadful
that his death should occur simultaneously with the discovery of
his infidelity.  After all, a poor husband was better than no
husband at all, and the Yankee ladies decided they'd be extra nice
to Scarlett.  But the others, Mrs. Meade, Mrs. Merriwether, Mrs.
Elsing, Tommy Wellburn's widow and most of all, Mrs. Ashley Wilkes,
they'd laugh in their faces every time they saw them.  That would
teach them a little courtesy.

Much of the whispering that went on in the dark rooms on the north
side of town that night was on this same subject.  Atlanta ladies
vehemently told their husbands that they did not care a rap what
the Yankees thought.  But inwardly they felt that running an Indian
gantlet would be infinitely preferable to suffering the ordeal of
Yankee grins and not being able to tell the truth about their
husbands.

Dr. Meade, beside himself with outraged dignity at the position
into which Rhett had jockeyed him and the others, told Mrs. Meade
that, but for the fact that it would implicate the others, he would
rather confess and be hanged than say he had been at Belle's house.

"It is an insult to you, Mrs. Meade," he fumed.

"But everyone will know you weren't there for--for--"

"The Yankees won't know.  They'll have to believe it if we save our
necks.  And they'll laugh.  The very thought that anyone will
believe it and laugh infuriates me.  And it insults you because--my
dear, I have always been faithful to you."

"I know that," and in the darkness Mrs. Meade smiled and slipped a
thin hand into the doctor's.  "But I'd rather it were really true
than have one hair of your head in danger."

"Mrs. Meade, do you know what you are saying?" cried the doctor,
aghast at the unsuspected realism of his wife.

"Yes, I know.  I've lost Darcy and I've lost Phil and you are all I
have and, rather than lose you, I'd have you take up your permanent
abode at that place."

"You are distrait!  You cannot know what you are saying."

"You old fool," said Mrs. Meade tenderly and laid her head against
his sleeve.

Dr. Meade fumed into silence and stroked her cheek and then
exploded again.  "And to be under obligation to that Butler man!
Hanging would be easy compared to that.  No, not even if I owe him
my life, can I be polite to him.  His insolence is monumental and
his shamelessness about his profiteering makes me boil.  To owe my
life to a man who never went in the army--"

"Melly said he enlisted after Atlanta fell."

"It's a lie.  Miss Melly will believe any plausible scoundrel.  And
what I can't understand is why he is doing all this--going to all
this trouble.  I hate to say it but--well, there's always been talk
about him and Mrs. Kennedy.  I've seen them coming in from rides
together too often this last year.  He must have done it because of
her."

"If it was because of Scarlett, he wouldn't have lifted his hand.
He'd have been glad to see Frank Kennedy hanged.  I think it's
because of Melly--"

"Mrs. Meade, you can't be insinuating that there's ever been
anything between those two!"

"Oh, don't be silly!  But she's always been unaccountably fond of
him ever since he tried to get Ashley exchanged during the war.
And I must say this for him, he never smiles in that nasty-nice way
when he's with her.  He's just as pleasant and thoughtful as can
be--really a different man.  You can tell by the way he acts with
Melly that he could be decent if he wanted to.  Now, my idea of why
he's doing all this is--"  She paused.  "Doctor, you won't like my
idea."

"I don't like anything about this whole affair!"

"Well, I think he did it partly for Melly's sake but mostly because
he thought it would be a huge joke on us all.  We've hated him so
much and showed it so plainly and now he's got us in a fix where
all of you have your choice of saying you were at that Watling
woman's house and shaming yourself and wives before the Yankees--or
telling the truth and getting hanged.  And he knows we'll all be
under obligation to him and his--mistress and that we'd almost
rather be hanged than be obliged to them.  Oh, I'll wager he's
enjoying it."

The doctor groaned.  "He did look amused when he took us upstairs
in that place."

"Doctor," Mrs. Meade hesitated, "what did it look like?"

"What are you saying, Mrs. Meade?"

"Her house.  What did it look like?  Are there cut-glass
chandeliers?  And red plush curtains and dozens of full-length gilt
mirrors?  And were the girls--were they unclothed?"

"Good God!" cried the doctor, thunderstruck, for it had never
occurred to him that the curiosity of a chaste woman concerning her
unchaste sisters was so devouring.  "How can you ask such immodest
questions?  You are not yourself.  I will mix you a sedative."

"I don't want a sedative.  I want to know.  Oh, dear, this is my
only chance to know what a bad house looks like and now you are
mean enough not to tell me!"

"I noticed nothing.  I assure you I was too embarrassed at finding
myself in such a place to take note of my surroundings," said the
doctor formally, more upset at this unsuspected revelation of his
wife's character than he had been by all the previous events of the
evening.  "If you will excuse me now, I will try to get some
sleep."

"Well, go to sleep then," she answered, disappointment in her
tones.  Then as the doctor leaned over to remove his boots, her
voice spoke from the darkness with renewed cheerfulness.  "I
imagine Dolly has gotten it all out of old man Merriwether and she
can tell me about it."

"Good Heavens, Mrs. Meade!  Do you mean to tell me that nice women
talk about such things among them--"

"Oh, go to bed," said Mrs. Meade.



It sleeted the next day, but as the wintry twilight drew on the icy
particles stopped falling and a cold wind blew.  Wrapped in her
cloak, Melanie went bewilderedly down her front walk behind a
strange negro coachman who had summoned her mysteriously to a
closed carriage waiting in front of the house.  As she came up to
the carriage the door was opened and she saw a woman in the dim
interior.

Leaning closer, peering inside, Melanie questioned:  "Who is it?
Won't you come in the house?  It's so cold--"

"Please come in here and set with me a minute, Miz Wilkes," came a
faintly familiar voice, an embarrassed voice from the depths of the
carriage.

"Oh, you're Miss--Mrs.--Watling!" cried Melanie.  "I did so want to
see you!  You must come in the house."

"I can't do that, Miz Wilkes."  Belle Watling's voice sounded
scandalized.  "You come in here and set a minute with me."

Melanie entered the carriage and the coachman closed the door
behind her.  She sat down beside Belle and reached for her hand.

"How can I ever thank you enough for what you did today!  How can
any of us thank you enough!"

"Miz Wilkes, you hadn't ought of sent me that note this mornin'.
Not that I wasn't proud to have a note from you but the Yankees
might have got it.  And as for sayin' you was goin' to call on me to
thank me--why, Miz Wilkes, you must of lost your mind!  The very
idea!  I come up here as soon as 'twas dark to tell you you mustn't
think of any sech thing.  Why, I--why, you--it wouldn't be fittin'
at all."

"It wouldn't be fitting for me to call and thank a kind woman who
saved my husband's life?"

"Oh, shucks, Miz Wilkes!  You know what I mean!"

Melanie was silent for a moment, embarrassed by the implication.
Somehow this handsome, sedately dressed woman sitting in the
darkness of the carriage didn't look and talk as she imagined a bad
woman, the Madam of a House, should look and talk.  She sounded
like--well, a little common and countrified but nice and warm
hearted.

"You were wonderful before the provost marshal today, Mrs. Watling!
You and the other--your--the young ladies certainly saved our men's
lives."

"Mr. Wilkes was the wonderful one.  I don't know how he even stood
up and told his story, much less look as cool as he done.  He was
sure bleedin' like a pig when I seen him last night.  Is he goin'
to be all right, Miz Wilkes?"

"Yes, thank you.  The doctor says it's just a flesh wound, though
he did lose a tremendous lot of blood.  This morning he was--well,
he was pretty well laced with brandy or he'd never have had the
strength to go through with it all so well.  But it was you, Mrs.
Watling, who saved them.  When you got mad and talked about the
broken mirrors you sounded so--so convincing."

"Thank you, Ma'm.  But I--I thought Captain Butler done mighty fine
too," said Belle, shy pride in her voice.

"Oh, he was wonderful!" cried Melanie warmly.  "The Yankees
couldn't help but believe his testimony.  He was so smart about the
whole affair.  I can never thank him enough--or you either!  How
good and kind you are!"

"Thank you kindly, Miz Wilkes.  It was a pleasure to do it.  I--I
hope it ain't goin' to embarrass you none, me sayin' Mr. Wilkes
come regular to my place.  He never, you know--"

"Yes, I know.  No, it doesn't embarrass me at all.  I'm just so
grateful to you."

"I'll bet the other ladies ain't grateful to me," said Belle with
sudden venom.  "And I'll bet they ain't grateful to Captain Butler
neither.  I'll bet they'll hate him just this much more.  I'll bet
you'll be the only lady who even says thanks to me.  I'll bet they
won't even look me in the eye when they see me on the street.  But
I don't care.  I wouldn't have minded if all their husbands got hung.
But I did mind about Mr. Wilkes.  You see I ain't forgot how nice
you was to me durin' the war, about the money for the hospital.
There ain't never been a lady in this town nice to me like you was
and I don't forget a kindness.  And I thought about you bein' left
a widder with a little boy if Mr. Wilkes got hung and--he's a nice
little boy, your boy is, Miz Wilkes.  I got a boy myself and so I--"

"Oh, you have?  Does he live--er--"

"Oh, no'm!  He ain't here in Atlanta.  He ain't never been here.
He's off at school.  I ain't seen him since he was little.  I--
well, anyway, when Captain Butler wanted me to lie for those men I
wanted to know who the men was and when I heard Mr. Wilkes was one
I never hesitated.  I said to my girls, I said, 'I'll whale the
livin' daylights out of you all if you don't make a special point
of sayin' you was with Mr. Wilkes all evenin'."

"Oh!" said Melanie, still more embarrassed by Belle's offhand
reference to her "girls."  "Oh, that was--er--kind of you and--of
them, too."

"No more'n you deserve," said Belle warmly.  "But I wouldn't of did
it for just anybody.  If it had been that Miz Kennedy's husband by
hisself, I wouldn't of lifted a finger, no matter what Captain
Butler said."

"Why?"

"Well, Miz Wilkes, people in my business knows a heap of things.
It'd surprise and shock a heap of fine ladies if they had any
notion how much we knows about them.  And she ain't no good, Miz
Wilkes.  She kilt her husband and that nice Wellburn boy, same as
if she shot them.  She caused it all, prancin' about Atlanta by
herself, enticin' niggers and trash.  Why, not one of my girls--"

"You must not say unkind things about my sister-in-law."  Melanie
stiffened coldly.

Belle put an eager placating hand on Melanie's arm and then hastily
withdrew it.

"Don't freeze me, please, Miz Wilkes.  I couldn't stand it after
you been so kind and sweet to me.  I forgot how you liked her and
I'm sorry for what I said.  I'm sorry about poor Mr. Kennedy bein'
dead too.  He was a nice man.  I used to buy some of the stuff for
my house from him and he always treated me pleasant.  But Miz
Kennedy--well, she just ain't in the same class with you, Miz
Wilkes.  She's a mighty cold woman and I can't help it if I think
so. . . .  When are they goin' to bury Mr. Kennedy?"

"Tomorrow morning.  And you are wrong about Mrs. Kennedy.  Why,
this very minute she's prostrated with grief."

"Maybe so," said Belle with evident disbelief.  "Well, I got to be
goin'.  I'm afraid somebody might recognize this carriage if I
stayed here longer and that wouldn't do you no good.  And, Miz
Wilkes, if you ever see me on the street, you--you don't have to
speak to me.  I'll understand."

"I shall be proud to speak to you.  Proud to be under obligation to
you.  I hope--I hope we meet again."

"No," said Belle.  "That wouldn't be fittin'.  Good night."



CHAPTER XLVII


Scarlett sat in her bedroom, picking at the supper tray Mammy had
brought her, listening to the wind hurling itself out of the night.
The house was frighteningly still, quieter even than when Frank had
lain in the parlor just a few hours before.  Then there had been
tiptoeing feet and hushed voices, muffled knocks on the door,
neighbors rustling in to whisper sympathy and occasional sobs from
Frank's sister who had come up from Jonesboro for the funeral.

But now the house was cloaked in silence.  Although her door was
open she could hear no sounds from below stairs.  Wade and the baby
had been at Melanie's since Frank's body was brought home and she
missed the sound of the boy's feet and Ella's gurgling.  There was
a truce in the kitchen and no sound of quarreling from Peter, Mammy
and Cookie floated up to her.  Even Aunt Pitty, downstairs in the
library, was not rocking her creaking chair in deference to
Scarlett's sorrow.

No one intruded upon her, believing that she wished to be left
alone with her grief, but to be left alone was the last thing
Scarlett desired.  Had it only been grief that companioned her, she
could have borne it as she had borne other griefs.  But, added to
her stunned sense of loss at Frank's death, were fear and remorse
and the torment of a suddenly awakened conscience.  For the first
time in her life she was regretting things she had done, regretting
them with a sweeping superstitious fear that made her cast sidelong
glances at the bed upon which she had lain with Frank.

She had killed Frank.  She had killed him just as surely as if it
had been her finger that pulled the trigger.  He had begged her not
to go about alone but she had not listened to him.  And now he was
dead because of her obstinacy.  God would punish her for that.  But
there lay upon her conscience another matter that was heavier and
more frightening even than causing his death--a matter which had
never troubled her until she looked upon his coffined face.  There
had been something helpless and pathetic in that still face which
had accused her.  God would punish her for marrying him when he
really loved Suellen.  She would have to cower at the seat of
judgment and answer for that lie she told him coming back from the
Yankee camp in his buggy.

Useless for her to argue now that the end justified the means, that
she was driven into trapping him, that the fate of too many people
hung on her for her to consider either his or Suellen's rights and
happiness.  The truth stood out boldly and she cowered away from
it.  She had married him coldly and used him coldly.  And she had
made him unhappy during the last six months when she could have
made him very happy.  God would punish her for not being nicer to
him--punish her for all her bullyings and proddings and storms of
temper and cutting remarks, for alienating his friends and shaming
him by operating the mills and building the saloon and leasing
convicts.

She had made him very unhappy and she knew it, but he had borne it
all like a gentleman.  The only thing she had ever done that gave
him any real happiness was to present him with Ella.  And she knew
if she could have kept from having Ella, Ella would never have been
born.

She shivered, frightened, wishing Frank were alive, so she could be
nice to him, so very nice to him to make up for it all.  Oh, if
only God did not seem so furious and vengeful!  Oh, if only the
minutes did not go by so slowly and the house were not so still!
If only she were not so alone!

If only Melanie were with her, Melanie could calm her fears.  But
Melanie was at home, nursing Ashley.  For a moment Scarlett thought
of summoning Pittypat to stand between her and her conscience but
she hesitated.  Pitty would probably make matters worse, for she
honestly mourned Frank.  He had been more her contemporary than
Scarlett's and she had been devoted to him.  He had filled to
perfection Pitty's need for "a man in the house," for he brought
her little presents and harmless gossip, jokes and stories, read
the paper to her at night and explained topics of the day to her
while she mended his socks.  She had fussed over him and planned
special dishes for him and coddled him during his innumerable
colds.  Now she missed him acutely and repeated over and over as
she dabbed at her red swollen eyes:  "If only he hadn't gone out
with the Klan!"

If there were only someone who could comfort her, quiet her fears,
explain to her just what were these confused fears which made her
heart sink with such cold sickness!  If only Ashley--but she shrank
from the thought.  She had almost killed Ashley, just as she had
killed Frank.  And if Ashley ever knew the real truth about how she
lied to Frank to get him, knew how mean she had been to Frank, he
could never love her any more.  Ashley was so honorable, so
truthful, so kind and he saw so straightly, so clearly.  If he knew
the whole truth, he would understand.  Oh, yes, he would understand
only too well!  But he would never love her any more.  So he must
never know the truth because he must keep on loving her.  How could
she live if that secret source of her strength, his love, were
taken from her?  But what a relief it would be to put her head on
his shoulder and cry and unburden her guilty heart!

The still house with the sense of death heavy upon it pressed about
her loneliness until she felt she could not bear it unaided any
longer.  She arose cautiously, pushed her door half-closed and then
dug about in the bottom bureau drawer beneath her underwear.  She
produced Aunt Pitty's "swoon bottle" of brandy which she had hidden
there and held it up to the lamp.  It was nearly half-empty.
Surely she hadn't drunk that much since last night!  She poured a
generous amount into her water glass and gulped it down.  She would
have to put the bottle back in the cellaret before morning, filled
to the top with water.  Mammy had hunted for it, just before the
funeral when the pallbearers wanted a drink, and already the air in
the kitchen was electric with suspicion between Mammy, Cookie and
Peter.

The brandy burned with fiery pleasantness.  There was nothing like
it when you needed it.  In fact, brandy was good almost any time,
so much better than insipid wine.  Why on earth should it be proper
for a woman to drink wine and not spirits?  Mrs. Merriwether and
Mrs. Meade had sniffed her breath most obviously at the funeral and
she had seen the triumphant look they had exchanged.  The old cats!

She poured another drink.  It wouldn't matter if she did get a
little tipsy tonight for she was going to bed soon and she could
gargle cologne before Mammy came up to unlace her.  She wished she
could get as completely and thoughtlessly drunk as Gerald used to
get on Court Day.  Then perhaps she could forget Frank's sunken
face accusing her of ruining his life and then killing him.

She wondered if everyone in town thought she had killed him.
Certainly the people at the funeral had been cold to her.  The only
people who had put any warmth into their expressions of sympathy
were the wives of the Yankee officers with whom she did business.
Well, she didn't care what the town said about her.  How
unimportant that seemed beside what she would have to answer for to
God!

She took another drink at the thought, shuddering as the hot brandy
went down her throat.  She felt very warm now but still she
couldn't get the thought of Frank out of her mind.  What fools men
were when they said liquor made people forget!  Unless she drank
herself into insensibility, she'd still see Frank's face as it had
looked the last time he begged her not to drive alone, timid,
reproachful, apologetic.

The knocker on the front door hammered with a dull sound that made
the still house echo and she heard Aunt Pitty's waddling steps
crossing the hall and the door opening.  There was the sound of
greeting and an indistinguishable murmur.  Some neighbor calling to
discuss the funeral or to bring a blanc mange.  Pitty would like
that.  She had taken an important and melancholy pleasure in
talking to the condolence callers.

She wondered incuriously who it was and, when a man's voice,
resonant and drawling, rose above Pitty's funereal whispering, she
knew.  Gladness and relief flooded her.  It was Rhett.  She had not
seen him since he broke the news of Frank's death to her, and now
she knew, deep in her heart, that he was the one person who could
help her tonight.

"I think she'll see me," Rhett's voice floated up to her.

"But she is lying down now, Captain Butler, and won't see anyone.
Poor child, she is quite prostrated.  She--"

"I think she will see me.  Please tell her I am going away tomorrow
and may be gone some time.  It's very important."

"But--" fluttered Aunt Pittypat.

Scarlett ran out into the hall, observing with some astonishment
that her knees were a little unsteady, and leaned over the
banisters.

"I'll be down terrectly, Rhett," she called.

She had a glimpse of Aunt Pittypat's plump upturned face, her eyes
owlish with surprise and disapproval.  Now it'll be all over town
that I conducted myself most improperly on the day of my husband's
funeral, thought Scarlett, as she hurried back to her room and
began smoothing her hair.  She buttoned her black basque up to the
chin and pinned down the collar with Pittypat's mourning brooch.  I
don't look very pretty she thought, leaning toward the mirror, too
white and scared.  For a moment her hand went toward the lock box
where she kept her rouge hidden but she decided against it.  Poor
Pittypat would be upset in earnest if she came downstairs pink and
blooming.  She picked up the cologne bottle and took a large
mouthful, carefully rinsed her mouth and then spit into the slop
jar.

She rustled down the stairs toward the two who still stood in the
hall, for Pittypat had been too upset by Scarlett's action to ask
Rhett to sit down.  He was decorously clad in black, his linen
frilly and starched, and his manner was all that custom demanded
from an old friend paying a call of sympathy on one bereaved.  In
fact, it was so perfect that it verged on the burlesque, though
Pittypat did not see it.  He was properly apologetic for disturbing
Scarlett and regretted that in his rush of closing up business
before leaving town he had been unable to be present at the
funeral.

"Whatever possessed him to come?" wondered Scarlett.  "He doesn't
mean a word he's saying."

"I hate to intrude on you at this time but I have a matter of
business to discuss that will not wait.  Something that Mr. Kennedy
and I were planning--"

"I didn't know you and Mr. Kennedy had business dealings," said
Aunt Pittypat, almost indignant that some of Frank's activities
were unknown to her.

"Mr. Kennedy was a man of wide interests," said Rhett respectfully.
"Shall we go into the parlor?"

"No!" cried Scarlett, glancing at the closed folding doors.  She
could still see the coffin in that room.  She hoped she never had
to enter it again.  Pitty, for once, took a hint, although with
none too good grace.

"Do use the library.  I must--I must go upstairs and get out the
mending.  Dear me, I've neglected it so this last week.  I declare--"

She went up the stairs with a backward look of reproach which was
noticed by neither Scarlett nor Rhett.  He stood aside to let her
pass before him into the library.

"What business did you and Frank have?" she questioned abruptly.

He came closer and whispered.  "None at all.  I just wanted to get
Miss Pitty out of the way."  He paused as he leaned over her.
"It's no good, Scarlett."

"What?"

"The cologne."

"I'm sure I don't know what you mean."

"I'm sure you do.  You've been drinking pretty heavily."

"Well, what if I have?  Is it any of your business?"

"The soul of courtesy, even in the depths of sorrow.  Don't drink
alone, Scarlett.  People always find it out and it ruins the
reputation.  And besides, it's a bad business, this drinking alone.
What's the matter, honey?"

He led her to the rosewood sofa and she sat down in silence.

"May I close the doors?"

She knew if Mammy saw the closed doors she would be scandalized and
would lecture and grumble about it for days, but it would be still
worse if Mammy should overhear this discussion of drinking,
especially in light of the missing brandy bottle.  She nodded and
Rhett drew the sliding doors together.  When he came back and sat
down beside her, his dark eyes alertly searching her face, the pall
of death receded before the vitality he radiated and the room
seemed pleasant and homelike again, the lamps rosy and warm.

"What's the matter, honey?"

No one in the world could say that foolish word of endearment as
caressingly as Rhett, even when he was joking, but he did not look
as if he were joking now.  She raised tormented eyes to his face
and somehow found comfort in the blank inscrutability she saw
there.  She did not know why this should be, for he was such an
unpredictable, callous person.  Perhaps it was because, as he often
said, they were so much alike.  Sometimes she thought that all the
people she had ever known were strangers except Rhett.

"Can't you tell me?" he took her hand, oddly gentle.  "It's more
than old Frank leaving you?  Do you need money?"

"Money?  God, no!  Oh, Rhett, I'm so afraid."

"Don't be a goose, Scarlett, you've never been afraid in your
life."

"Oh, Rhett, I am afraid!"

The words bubbled up faster than she could speak them.  She could
tell him.  She could tell Rhett anything.  He'd been so bad himself
that he wouldn't sit in judgment on her.  How wonderful to know
someone who was bad and dishonorable and a cheat and a liar, when
all the world was filled with people who would not lie to save
their souls and who would rather starve than do a dishonorable
deed!

"I'm afraid I'll die and go to hell."

If he laughed at her she would die, right then.  But he did not
laugh.

"You are pretty healthy--and maybe there isn't any hell after all."

"Oh, but there is, Rhett!  You know there is!"

"I know there is but it's right here on earth.  Not after we die.
There's nothing after we die, Scarlett.  You are having your hell
now."

"Oh, Rhett, that's blasphemous!"

"But singularly comforting.  Tell me, why are you going to hell?"

He was teasing now, she could see the glint in his eyes but she did
not mind.  His hands felt so warm and strong, so comforting to
cling to.

"Rhett, I oughtn't to have married Frank.  It was wrong.  He was
Suellen's beau and he loved her, not me.  But I lied to him and
told him she was going to marry Tony Fontaine.  Oh, how could I
have done it?"

"Ah, so that was how it came about!  I always wondered."

"And then I made him so miserable.  I made him do all sorts of
things he didn't want to do, like making people pay their bills
when they really couldn't afford to pay them.  And it hurt him so
when I ran the mills and built the saloon and leased convicts.  He
could hardly hold up his head for shame.  And Rhett, I killed him.
Yes, I did!  I didn't know he was in the Klan.  I never dreamed he
had that much gumption.  But I ought to have known.  And I killed
him."

"'Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood clean from my
hand?'"

"What?"

"No matter.  Go on."

"Go on?  That's all.  Isn't it enough?  I married him, I made him
unhappy and I killed him.  Oh, my God!  I don't see how I could
have done it!  I lied to him and I married him.  It all seemed so
right when I did it but now I see how wrong it was.  Rhett, it
doesn't seem like it was me who did all these things.  I was so
mean to him but I'm not really mean.  I wasn't raised that way.
Mother--"  She stopped and swallowed.  She had avoided thinking of
Ellen all day but she could no longer blot out her image.

"I often wondered what she was like.  You seemed to me so like your
father."

"Mother was--  Oh, Rhett, for the first time I'm glad she's dead,
so she can't see me.  She didn't raise me to be mean.  She was so
kind to everybody, so good.  She'd rather I'd have starved than
done this.  And I so wanted to be just like her in every way and
I'm not like her one bit.  I hadn't thought of that--there's been
so much else to think about--but I wanted to be like her.  I didn't
want to be like Pa.  I loved him but he was--so--so thoughtless.
Rhett, sometimes I did try so hard to be nice to people and kind to
Frank, but then the nightmare would come back and scare me so bad
I'd want to rush out and just grab money away from people, whether
it was mine or not."

Tears were streaming unheeded down her face and she clutched his
hand so hard that her nails dug into his flesh.

"What nightmare?"  His voice was calm and soothing.

"Oh--I forgot you didn't know.  Well, just when I would try to be
nice to folks and tell myself that money wasn't everything, I'd go
to bed and dream that I was back at Tara right after Mother died,
right after the Yankees went through.  Rhett, you can't imagine--I
get cold when I think about it.  I can see how everything is burned
and so still and there's nothing to eat.  Oh, Rhett, in my dream
I'm hungry again."

"Go on."

"I'm hungry and everybody, Pa and the girls and the darkies, are
starving and they keep saying over and over:  'We're hungry' and
I'm so empty it hurts, and so frightened.  My mind keeps saying:
'If I ever get out of this, I'll never, never be hungry again' and
then the dream goes off into a gray mist and I'm running, running
in the mist, running so hard my heart's about to burst and
something is chasing me, and I can't breathe but I keep thinking
that if I can just get there, I'll be safe.  But I don't know where
I'm trying to get to.  And then I'd wake up and I'd be cold with
fright and so afraid that I'd be hungry again.  When I wake up from
that dream, it seems like there's not enough money in the world to
keep me from being afraid of being hungry again.  And then Frank
would be so mealy mouthed and slow poky that he would make me mad
and I'd lose my temper.  He didn't understand, I guess, and I
couldn't make him understand.  I kept thinking that I'd make it up
to him some day when we had money and I wasn't so afraid of being
hungry.  And now he's dead and it's too late.  Oh, it seemed so
right when I did it but it was all so wrong.  If I had it to do
over again, I'd do it so differently."

"Hush," he said, disentangling her frantic grip and pulling a clean
handkerchief from his pocket.  "Wipe your face.  There is no sense
in your tearing yourself to pieces this way."

She took the handkerchief and wiped her damp cheeks, a little
relief stealing over her as if she had shifted some of her burden
to his broad shoulders.  He looked so capable and calm and even the
slight twist of his mouth was comforting as though it proved her
agony and confusion unwarranted.

"Feel better now?  Then let's get to the bottom of this.  You say
if you had it to do over again, you'd do it differently.  But would
you?  Think, now.  Would you?"

"Well--"

"No, you'd do the same things again.  Did you have any other
choice?"

"No."

"Then what are you sorry about?"

"I was so mean and now he's dead."

"And if he wasn't dead, you'd still be mean.  As I understand it,
you are not really sorry for marrying Frank and bullying him and
inadvertently causing his death.  You are only sorry because you
are afraid of going to hell.  Is that right?"

"Well--that sounds so mixed up."

"Your ethics are considerably mixed up too.  You are in the exact
position of a thief who's been caught red handed and isn't sorry he
stole but is terribly, terribly sorry he's going to jail."

"A thief--"

"Oh, don't be so literal!  In other words if you didn't have this
silly idea that you were damned to hell fire eternal, you'd think
you were well rid of Frank."

"Oh, Rhett!"

"Oh, come!  You are confessing and you might as well confess the
truth as a decorous lie.  Did your--er--conscience bother you much
when you offered to--shall we say--part with that jewel which is
dearer than life for three hundred dollars?"

The brandy was spinning in her head now and she felt giddy and a
little reckless.  What was the use in lying to him?  He always
seemed to read her mind.

"I really didn't think about God much then--or hell.  And when I
did think--well, I just reckoned God would understand."

"But you don't credit God with understanding why you married
Frank?"

"Rhett, how can you talk so about God when you know you don't
believe there is one?"

"But you believe in a God of Wrath and that's what's important at
present.  Why shouldn't the Lord understand?  Are you sorry you
still own Tara and there aren't Carpetbaggers living there?  Are
you sorry you aren't hungry and ragged?"

"Oh, no!"

"Well, did you have any alternative except marrying Frank?"

"No."

"He didn't have to marry you, did he?  Men are free agents.  And he
didn't have to let you bully him into doing things he didn't want
to, did he?"

"Well--"

"Scarlett, why worry about it?  If you had it to do over again you
would be driven to the lie and he to marrying you.  You would still
have run yourself into danger and he would have had to avenge you.
If he had married Sister Sue, she might not have caused his death
but she'd probably have made him twice as unhappy as you did.  It
couldn't have happened differently."

"But I could have been nicer to him."

"You could have been--if you'd been somebody else.  But you were
born to bully anyone who'll let you do it.  The strong were made to
bully and the weak to knuckle under.  It's all Frank's fault for
not beating you with a buggy whip. . . .  I'm surprised at you,
Scarlett, for sprouting a conscience this late in life.  Opportunists
like you shouldn't have them."

"What is an oppor--what did you call it?"

"A person who takes advantage of opportunities."

"Is that wrong?"

"It has always been held in disrepute--especially by those who had
the same opportunities and didn't take them."

"Oh, Rhett, you are joking and I thought you were going to be
nice!"

"I am being nice--for me.  Scarlett, darling, you are tipsy.
That's what's the matter with you."

"You dare--"

"Yes, I dare.  You are on the verge of what is vulgarly called a
'crying jag' and so I shall change the subject and cheer you up by
telling you some news that will amuse you.  In fact, that's why I
came here this evening, to tell you my news before I went away."

"Where are you going?"

"To England and I may be gone for months.  Forget your conscience,
Scarlett.  I have no intention of discussing your soul's welfare
any further.  Don't you want to hear my news?"

"But--" she began feebly and paused.  Between the brandy which was
smoothing out the harsh contours of remorse and Rhett's mocking but
comforting words, the pale specter of Frank was receding into
shadows.  Perhaps Rhett was right.  Perhaps God did understand.
She recovered enough to push the idea from the top of her mind and
decide:  "I'll think about it all tomorrow."

"What's your news?" she said with an effort, blowing her nose on
his handkerchief and pushing back the hair that had begun to
straggle.

"My news is this," he answered, grinning down at her.  "I still
want you more than any woman I've ever seen and now that Frank's
gone, I thought you'd be interested to know it."

Scarlett jerked her hands away from his grasp and sprang to her
feet.

"I--you are the most ill-bred man in the world, coming here at this
time of all times with your filthy--I should have known you'd never
change.  And Frank hardly cold!  If you had any decency--  Will you
leave this--"

"Do be quiet or you'll have Miss Pittypat down here in a minute,"
he said, not rising but reaching up and taking both her fists.
"I'm afraid you miss my point."

"Miss your point?  I don't miss anything."  She pulled against his
grip.  "Turn me loose and get out of here.  I never heard of such
bad taste.  I--"

"Hush," he said.  "I am asking you to marry me.  Would you be
convinced if I knelt down?"

She said "Oh" breathlessly and sat down hard on the sofa.

She stared at him, her mouth open, wondering if the brandy were
playing tricks on her mind, remembering senselessly his jibing:
"My dear, I'm not a marrying man."  She was drunk or he was crazy.
But he did not look crazy.  He looked as calm as though he were
discussing the weather, and his smooth drawl fell on her ears with
no particular emphasis.

"I always intended having you, Scarlett, since that first day I saw
you at Twelve Oaks when you threw that vase and swore and proved
that you weren't a lady.  I always intended having you, one way or
another.  But as you and Frank have made a little money, I know
you'll never be driven to me again with any interesting propositions
of loans and collaterals.  So I see I'll have to marry you."

"Rhett Butler, is this one of your vile jokes?"

"I bare my soul and you are suspicious!  No, Scarlett, this is a
bona fide honorable declaration.  I admit that it's not in the best
of taste, coming at this time, but I have a very good excuse for my
lack of breeding.  I'm going away tomorrow for a long time and I
fear that if I wait till I return you'll have married some one else
with a little money.  So I thought, why not me and my money?
Really, Scarlett, I can't go all my life, waiting to catch you
between husbands."

He meant it.  There was no doubt about it.  Her mouth was dry as
she assimilated this knowledge and she swallowed and looked into
his eyes, trying to find some clue.  They were full of laughter but
there was something else, deep in them, which she had never seen
before, a gleam that defied analysis.  He sat easily, carelessly
but she felt that he was watching her as alertly as a cat watches a
mouse hole.  There was a sense of leashed power straining beneath
his calm that made her draw back, a little frightened.

He was actually asking her to marry him; he was committing the
incredible.  Once she had planned how she would torment him should
he ever propose.  Once she had thought that if he ever spoke those
words she would humble him and make him feel her power and take a
malicious pleasure in doing it.  Now, he had spoken and the plans
did not even occur to her, for he was no more in her power than he
had ever been.  In fact, he held the whip hand of the situation so
completely that she was as flustered as a girl at her first
proposal and she could only blush and stammer.

"I--I shall never marry again."

"Oh, yes, you will.  You were born to be married.  Why not me?"

"But Rhett, I--I don't love you."

"That should be no drawback.  I don't recall that love was
prominent in your other two ventures."

"Oh, how can you?  You know I was fond of Frank!"

He said nothing.

"I was!  I was!"

"Well, we won't argue that.  Will you think over my proposition
while I'm gone?"

"Rhett, I don't like for things to drag on.  I'd rather tell you
now.  I'm going home to Tara soon and India Wilkes will stay with
Aunt Pittypat.  I want to go home for a long spell and--I--I don't
ever want to get married again."

"Nonsense.  Why?"

"Oh, well--never mind why.  I just don't like being married."

"But, my poor child, you've never really been married.  How can you
know?  I'll admit you've had bad luck--once for spite and once for
money.  Did you ever think of marrying--just for the fun of it?"

"Fun!  Don't talk like a fool.  There's no fun being married."

"No?  Why not?"

A measure of calm had returned and with it all the natural
bluntness which brandy brought to the surface.

"It's fun for men--though God knows why.  I never could understand
it.  But all a woman gets out of it is something to eat and a lot
of work and having to put up with a man's foolishness--and a baby
every year."

He laughed so loudly that the sound echoed in the stillness and
Scarlett heard the kitchen door open.

"Hush!  Mammy has ears like a lynx and it isn't decent to laugh so
soon after--hush laughing.  You know it's true.  Fun!  Fiddle-dee-
dee!"

"I said you'd had bad luck and what you've just said proves it.
You've been married to a boy and to an old man.  And into the
bargain I'll bet your mother told you that women must bear 'these
things' because of the compensating joys of motherhood.  Well,
that's all wrong.  Why not try marrying a fine young man who has a
bad reputation and a way with women?  It'll be fun."

"You are coarse and conceited and I think this conversation has
gone far enough.  It's--it's quite vulgar."

"And quite enjoyable, too, isn't it?  I'll wager you never
discussed the marital relation with a man before, even Charles or
Frank."

She scowled at him.  Rhett knew too much.  She wondered where he
had learned all he knew about women.  It wasn't decent.

"Don't frown.  Name the day, Scarlett.  I'm not urging instant
matrimony because of your reputation.  We'll wait the decent
interval.  By the way, just how long is a 'decent interval'?"

"I haven't said I'd marry you.  It isn't decent to even talk of
such things at such a time."

"I've told you why I'm talking of them.  I'm going away tomorrow
and I'm too ardent a lover to restrain my passion any longer.  But
perhaps I've been too precipitate in my wooing."

With a suddenness that startled her, he slid off the sofa onto his
knees and with one hand placed delicately over his heart, he
recited rapidly:

"Forgive me for startling you with the impetuosity of my sentiments,
my dear Scarlett--I mean, my dear Mrs. Kennedy.  It cannot have
escaped your notice that for some time past the friendship I have
had in my heart for you has ripened into a deeper feeling, a feeling
more beautiful, more pure, more sacred.  Dare I name it you?  Ah!
It is love which makes me so bold!"

"Do get up," she entreated.  "You look such a fool and suppose
Mammy should come in and see you?"

"She would be stunned and incredulous at the first signs of my
gentility," said Rhett, arising lightly.  "Come, Scarlett, you are
no child, no schoolgirl to put me off with foolish excuses about
decency and so forth.  Say you'll marry me when I come back or,
before God, I won't go.  I'll stay around here and play a guitar
under your window every night and sing at the top of my voice and
compromise you, so you'll have to marry me to save your reputation."

"Rhett, do be sensible.  I don't want to marry anybody."

"No?  You aren't telling me the real reason.  It can't be girlish
timidity.  What is it?"

Suddenly she thought of Ashley, saw him as vividly as though he
stood beside her, sunny haired, drowsy eyed, full of dignity, so
utterly different from Rhett.  He was the real reason she did not
want to marry again, although she had no objections to Rhett and at
times was genuinely fond of him.  She belonged to Ashley, forever
and ever.  She had never belonged to Charles or Frank, could never
really belong to Rhett.  Every part of her, almost everything she
had ever done, striven after, attained, belonged to Ashley, were
done because she loved him.  Ashley and Tara, she belonged to them.
The smiles, the laughter, the kisses she had given Charles and
Frank were Ashley's, even though he had never claimed them, would
never claim them.  Somewhere deep in her was the desire to keep
herself for him, although she knew he would never take her.

She did not know that her face had changed, that reverie had
brought a softness to her face which Rhett had never seen before.
He looked at the slanting green eyes, wide and misty, and the
tender curve of her lips and for a moment his breath stopped.  Then
his mouth went down violently at one corner and he swore with
passionate impatience.

"Scarlett O'Hara, you're a fool!"

Before she could withdraw her mind from its far places, his arms
were around her, as sure and hard as on the dark road to Tara, so
long ago.  She felt again the rush of helplessness, the sinking
yielding, the surging tide of warmth that left her limp.  And the
quiet face of Ashley Wilkes was blurred and drowned to nothingness.
He bent back her head across his arm and kissed her, softly at
first, and then with a swift gradation of intensity that made her
cling to him as the only solid thing in a dizzy swaying world.  His
insistent mouth was parting her shaking lips, sending wild tremors
along her nerves, evoking from her sensations she had never known
she was capable of feeling.  And before a swimming giddiness spun
her round and round, she knew that she was kissing him back.

"Stop--please, I'm faint!" she whispered, trying to turn her head
weakly from him.  He pressed her head back hard against his
shoulder and she had a dizzy glimpse of his face.  His eyes were
wide and blazing queerly and the tremor in his arms frightened her.

"I want to make you faint.  I will make you faint.  You've had this
coming to you for years.  None of the fools you've known have
kissed you like this--have they?  Your precious Charles or Frank or
your stupid Ashley--"

"Please--"

"I said your stupid Ashley.  Gentlemen all--what do they know about
women?  What did they know about you?  I know you."

His mouth was on hers again and she surrendered without a struggle,
too weak even to turn her head, without even the desire to turn it,
her heart shaking her with its poundings, fear of his strength and
her nerveless weakness sweeping her.  What was he going to do?  She
would faint if he did not stop.  If he would only stop--if he would
never stop.

"Say Yes!"  His mouth was poised above hers and his eyes were so
close that they seemed enormous, filling the world.  "Say Yes, damn
you, or--"

She whispered "Yes" before she even thought.  It was almost as if
he had willed the word and she had spoken it without her own
volition.  But even as she spoke it, a sudden calm fell on her
spirit, her head began to stop spinning and even the giddiness of
the brandy was lessened.  She had promised to marry him when she
had had no intention of promising.  She hardly knew how it had all
come about but she was not sorry.  It now seemed very natural that
she had said Yes--almost as if by divine intervention, a hand
stronger than hers was about her affairs, settling her problems for
her.

He drew a quick breath as she spoke and bent as if to kiss her
again and her eyes closed and her head fell back.  But he drew back
and she was faintly disappointed.  It made her feel so strange to
be kissed like this and yet there was something exciting about it.

He sat very still for a while holding her head against his shoulder
and, as if by effort, the trembling of his arms ceased.  He moved
away from her a little and looked down at her.  She opened her eyes
and saw that the frightening glow had gone from his face.  But
somehow she could not meet his gaze and she dropped her eyes in a
rush of tingling confusion.

When he spoke his voice was very calm.

"You meant it?  You don't want to take it back?"

"No."

"It's not just because I've--what is the phrase?--'swept you off
your feet' by my--er--ardor?"

She could not answer for she did not know what to say, nor could
she meet his eyes.  He put a hand under her chin and lifted her
face.

"I told you once that I could stand anything from you except a lie.
And now I want the truth.  Just why did you say Yes?"

Still the words would not come, but, a measure of poise returning,
she kept her eyes demurely down and tucked the corners of her mouth
into a little smile.

"Look at me.  Is it my money?"

"Why, Rhett!  What a question!"

"Look up and don't try to sweet talk me.  I'm not Charles or Frank
or any of the County boys to be taken in by your fluttering lids.
Is it my money?"

"Well--yes, a part."

"A part?"

He did not seem annoyed.  He drew a swift breath and with an effort
wiped from his eyes the eagerness her words had brought, an
eagerness which she was too confused to see.

"Well," she floundered helplessly, "money does help, you know,
Rhett, and God knows Frank didn't leave any too much.  But then--
well, Rhett, we do get on, you know.  And you are the only man I
ever saw who could stand the truth from a woman, and it would be
nice having a husband who didn't think me a silly fool and expect
me to tell lies--and--well, I am fond of you."

"Fond of me?"

"Well," she said fretfully, "if I said I was madly in love with
you, I'd be lying and what's more, you'd know it."

"Sometimes I think you carry your truth telling too far, my pet.
Don't you think, even if it was a lie, that it would be appropriate
for you to say 'I love you, Rhett,' even if you didn't mean it?"

What was he driving at, she wondered, becoming more confused.  He
looked so queer, eager, hurt, mocking.  He took his hands from her
and shoved them deep in his trousers pockets and she saw him ball
his fists.

"If it costs me a husband, I'll tell the truth," she thought
grimly, her blood up as always when he baited her.

"Rhett, it would be a lie, and why should we go through all that
foolishness?  I'm fond of you, like I said.  You know how it is.
You told me once that you didn't love me but that we had a lot in
common.  Both rascals, was the way you--"

"Oh, God!" he whispered rapidly, turning his head away.  "To be
taken in my own trap!"

"What did you say?"

"Nothing," and he looked at her and laughed, but it was not a
pleasant laugh.  "Name the day, my dear," and he laughed again and
bent and kissed her hands.  She was relieved to see his mood pass
and good humor apparently return, so she smiled too.

He played with her hand for a moment and grinned up at her.

"Did you ever in your novel reading come across the old situation
of the disinterested wife falling in love with her own husband?"

"You know I don't read novels," she said and, trying to equal his
jesting mood, went on:  "Besides, you once said it was the height
of bad form for husbands and wives to love each other."

"I once said too God damn many things," he retorted abruptly and
rose to his feet.

"Don't swear."

"You'll have to get used to it and learn to swear too.  You'll have
to get used to all my bad habits.  That'll be part of the price of
being--fond of me and getting your pretty paws on my money."

"Well, don't fly off the handle so, because I didn't lie and make
you feel conceited.  You aren't in love with me, are you?  Why
should I be in love with you?"

"No, my dear, I'm not in love with you, no more than you are with
me, and if I were, you would be the last person I'd ever tell.  God
help the man who ever really loves you.  You'd break his heart, my
darling, cruel, destructive little cat who is so careless and
confident she doesn't even trouble to sheathe her claws."

He jerked her to her feet and kissed her again, but this time his
lips were different for he seemed not to care if he hurt her--
seemed to want to hurt her, to insult her.  His lips slid down to
her throat and finally he pressed them against the taffeta over her
breast, so hard and so long that his breath burnt to her skin.  Her
hands struggled up, pushing him away in outraged modesty.

"You mustn't!  How dare you!"

"Your heart's going like a rabbit's," he said mockingly.  "All too
fast for mere fondness I would think, if I were conceited.  Smooth
your ruffled feathers.  You are just putting on these virginal
airs.  Tell me what I shall bring you from England.  A ring?  What
kind would you like?"

She wavered momentarily between interest in his last words and a
feminine desire to prolong the scene with anger and indignation.

"Oh--a diamond ring--and Rhett, do buy a great big one."

"So you can flaunt it before your poverty-stricken friends and say
'See what I caught!'  Very well, you shall have a big one, one so
big that your less-fortunate friends can comfort themselves by
whispering that it's really vulgar to wear such large stones."

He abruptly started off across the room and she followed him,
bewildered, to the closed doors.

"What is the matter?  Where are you going?"

"To my rooms to finish packing."

"Oh, but--"

"But, what?"

"Nothing.  I hope you have a nice trip."

"Thank you."

He opened the door and walked into the hall.  Scarlett trailed
after him, somewhat at a loss, a trifle disappointed as at an
unexpected anticlimax.  He slipped on his coat and picked up his
gloves and hat.

"I'll write you.  Let me know if you change your mind."

"Aren't you--"

"Well?"  He seemed impatient to be off.

"Aren't you going to kiss me good-by?" she whispered, mindful of
the ears of the house.

"Don't you think you've had enough kissing for one evening?" he
retorted and grinned down at her.  "To think of a modest, well-
brought-up young woman--  Well, I told you it would be fun, didn't
I?"

"Oh, you are impossible!" she cried in wrath, not caring if Mammy
did hear.  "And I don't care if you never come back."

She turned and flounced toward the stairs, expecting to feel his
warm hand on her arm, stopping her.  But he only pulled open the
front door and a cold draft swept in.

"But I will come back," he said and went out, leaving her on the
bottom step looking at the closed door.

The ring Rhett brought back from England was large indeed, so large
it embarrassed Scarlett to wear it.  She loved gaudy and expensive
jewelry but she had an uneasy feeling that everyone was saying,
with perfect truth, that this ring was vulgar.  The central stone
was a four-carat diamond and, surrounding it, were a number of
emeralds.  It reached to the knuckle of her finger and gave her
hand the appearance of being weighted down.  Scarlett had a
suspicion that Rhett had gone to great pains to have the ring made
up and, for pure meanness, had ordered it made as ostentatious as
possible.

Until Rhett was back in Atlanta and the ring on her finger she told
no one, not even her family, of her intentions, and when she did
announce her engagement a storm of bitter gossip broke out.  Since
the Klan affair Rhett and Scarlett had been, with the exception of
the Yankees and Carpetbaggers, the town's most unpopular citizens.
Everyone had disapproved of Scarlett since the far-away day when
she abandoned the weeds worn for Charlie Hamilton.  Their
disapproval had grown stronger because of her unwomanly conduct in
the matter of the mills, her immodesty in showing herself when she
was pregnant and so many other things.  But when she brought about
the death of Frank and Tommy and jeopardized the lives of a dozen
other men, their dislike flamed into public condemnation.

As for Rhett, he had enjoyed the town's hatred since his
speculations during the war and he had not further endeared himself
to his fellow citizens by his alliances with the Republicans since
then.  But, oddly enough, the fact that he had saved the lives of
some of Atlanta's most prominent men was what aroused the hottest
hate of Atlanta's ladies.

It was not that they regretted their men were still alive.  It was
that they bitterly resented owing the men's lives to such a man as
Rhett and to such an embarrassing trick.  For months they had
writhed under Yankee laughter and scorn, and the ladies felt and
said that if Rhett really had the good of the Klan at heart he
would have managed the affair in a more seemly fashion.  They said
he had deliberately dragged in Belle Watling to put the nice people
of the town in a disgraceful position.  And so he deserved neither
thanks for rescuing the men nor forgiveness for his past sins.

These women, so swift to kindness, so tender to the sorrowing, so
untiring in times of stress, could be as implacable as furies to
any renegade who broke one small law of their unwritten code.  This
code was simple.  Reverence for the Confederacy, honor to the
veterans, loyalty to old forms, pride in poverty, open hands to
friends and undying hatred to Yankees.  Between them, Scarlett and
Rhett had outraged every tenet of this code.

The men whose lives Rhett had saved attempted, out of decency and a
sense of gratitude, to keep their women silent but they had little
success.  Before the announcement of their coming marriage, the two
had been unpopular enough but people could still be polite to them
in a formal way.  Now even that cold courtesy was no longer
possible.  The news of their engagement came like an explosion,
unexpected and shattering, rocking the town, and even the mildest-
mannered women spoke their minds heatedly.  Marrying barely a year
after Frank's death and she had killed him!  And marrying that
Butler man who owned a brothel and who was in with the Yankees and
Carpetbaggers in all kinds of thieving schemes!  Separately the two
of them could be endured, but the brazen combination of Scarlett
and Rhett was too much to be borne.  Common and vile, both of them!
They ought to be run out of town!

Atlanta might perhaps have been more tolerant toward the two if the
news of their engagement had not come at a time when Rhett's
Carpetbagger and Scallawag cronies were more odious in the sight of
respectable citizens than they had ever been before.  Public
feeling against the Yankees and all their allies was at fever heat
at the very time when the town learned of the engagement, for the
last citadel of Georgia's resistance to Yankee rule had just
fallen.  The long campaign which had begun when Sherman moved
southward from above Dalton, four years before, had finally reached
its climax, and the state's humiliation was complete.

Three years of Reconstruction had passed and they had been three
years of terrorism.  Everyone had thought that conditions were
already as bad as they could ever be.  But now Georgia was
discovering that Reconstruction at its worst had just begun.

For three years the Federal government had been trying to impose
alien ideas and an alien rule upon Georgia and, with an army to
enforce its commands, it had largely succeeded.  But only the power
of the military upheld the new regime.  The state was under the
Yankee rule but not by the state's consent.  Georgia's leaders had
kept on battling for the state's right to govern itself according
to its own ideas.  They had continued resisting all efforts to
force them to bow down and accept the dictates of Washington as
their own state law.

Officially, Georgia's government had never capitulated but it had
been a futile fight, an ever-losing fight.  It was a fight that
could not win but it had, at least, postponed the inevitable.
Already many other Southern states had illiterate negroes in high
public office and legislatures dominated by negroes and
Carpetbaggers.  But Georgia, by its stubborn resistance, had so far
escaped this final degradation.  For the greater part of three
years, the state's capitol had remained in the control of white men
and Democrats.  With Yankee soldiers everywhere, the state
officials could do little but protest and resist.  Their power was
nominal but they had at least been able to keep the state
government in the hands of native Georgians.  Now even that last
stronghold had fallen.

Just as Johnston and his men had been driven back step by step from
Dalton to Atlanta, four years before, so had the Georgia Democrats
been driven back little by little, from 1865 on.  The power of the
Federal government over the state's affairs and the lives of its
citizens had been steadily made greater and greater.  Force had
been piled on top of force and military edicts in increasing
numbers had rendered the civil authority more and more impotent.
Finally, with Georgia in the status of a military province, the
polls had been ordered thrown open to the negroes, whether the
state's laws permitted it or not.

A week before Scarlett and Rhett announced their engagement, an
election for governor had been held.  The Southern Democrats had
General John B. Gordon, one of Georgia's best loved and most
honored citizens, as their candidate.  Opposing him was a
Republican named Bullock.  The election had lasted three days
instead of one.  Trainloads of negroes had been rushed from town to
town, voting at every precinct along the way.  Of course, Bullock
had won.

If the capture of Georgia by Sherman had caused bitterness, the
final capture of the state's capitol by the Carpetbaggers, Yankees
and negroes caused an intensity of bitterness such as the state had
never known before.  Atlanta and Georgia seethed and raged.

And Rhett Butler was a friend of the hated Bullock!

Scarlett, with her usual disregard of all matters not directly
under her nose, had scarcely known an election was being held.
Rhett had taken no part in the election and his relations with the
Yankees were no different from what they had always been.  But the
fact remained that Rhett was a Scallawag and a friend of Bullock.
And, if the marriage went through, Scarlett also would be turning
Scallawag.  Atlanta was in no mood to be tolerant or charitable
toward anyone in the enemy camp and, the news of the engagement
coming when it did, the town remembered all of the evil things
about the pair and none of the good.

Scarlett knew the town was rocking but she did not realize the
extent of public feeling until Mrs. Merriwether, urged on by her
church circle, took it upon herself to speak to her for her own
good.

"Because your own dear mother is dead and Miss Pitty, not being a
matron, is not qualified to--er, well, to talk to you upon such a
subject, I feel that I must warn you, Scarlett, Captain Butler is
not the kind of a man for any woman of good family to marry.  He is
a--"

"He managed to save Grandpa Merriwether's neck and your nephew's,
too."

Mrs. Merriwether swelled.  Hardly an hour before she had had an
irritating talk with Grandpa.  The old man had remarked that she
must not value his hide very much if she did not feel some
gratitude to Rhett Butler, even if the man was a Scallawag and a
scoundrel.

"He only did that as a dirty trick on us all, Scarlett, to
embarrass us in front of the Yankees," Mrs. Merriwether continued.
"You know as well as I do that the man is a rogue.  He always has
been and now he's unspeakable.  He is simply not the kind of man
decent people receive."

"No?  That's strange, Mrs. Merriwether.  He was in your parlor
often enough during the war.  And he gave Maybelle her white satin
wedding dress, didn't he?  Or is my memory wrong?"

"Things are so different during the war and nice people associated
with many men who were not quite--  It was all for the Cause and
very proper, too.  Surely you can't be thinking of marrying a man
who wasn't in the army, who jeered at men who did enlist?"

"He was, too, in the army.  He was in the army eight months.  He
was in the last campaign and fought at Franklin and was with
General Johnston when he surrendered."

"I had not heard that," said Mrs. Merriwether and she looked as if
she did not believe it either.  "But he wasn't wounded," she added,
triumphantly.

"Lots of men weren't."

"Everybody who was anybody got wounded.  _I_ know no one who wasn't
wounded."

Scarlett was goaded.

"Then I guess all the men you knew were such fools they didn't know
when to come in out of a shower of rain--or of minie balls.  Now,
let me tell you this, Mrs. Merriwether, and you can take it back to
your busybody friends.  I'm going to marry Captain Butler and I
wouldn't care if he'd fought on the Yankee side."

When that worthy matron went out of the house with her bonnet
jerking with rage, Scarlett knew she had an open enemy now instead
of a disapproving friend.  But she did not care.  Nothing Mrs.
Merriwether could say or do could hurt her.  She did not care what
anyone said--anyone except Mammy.

Scarlett had borne with Pitty's swooning at the news and had
steeled herself to see Ashley look suddenly old and avoid her eyes
as he wished her happiness.  She had been amused and irritated at
the letters from Aunt Pauline and Aunt Eulalie in Charleston,
horror struck at the news, forbidding the marriage, telling her it
would not only ruin her social position but endanger theirs.  She
had even laughed when Melanie with a worried pucker in her brows
said loyally:  "Of course, Captain Butler is much nicer than most
people realize and he was so kind and clever, the way he saved
Ashley.  And after all, he did fight for the Confederacy.  But,
Scarlett, don't you think you'd better not decide so hastily?"

No, she didn't mind what anybody said, except Mammy.  Mammy's words
were the ones that made her most angry and brought the greatest
hurt.

"Ah has seed you do a heap of things dat would hu't Miss Ellen, did
she know.  An' it has done sorrered me a plen'y.  But disyere is de
wust yit.  Mahyin' trash!  Yas'm, Ah said trash!  Doan go tellin'
me he come frum fine folkses.  Dat doan mek no diffunce.  Trash
come outer de high places, same as de low, and he trash!  Yas'm,
Miss Scarlett, Ah's seed you tek Mist' Charles 'way frum Miss Honey
w'en you din' keer nuthin' 'bout him.  An' Ah's seed you rob yo own
sister of Mist' Frank.  An' Ah's heshed mah mouf 'bout a heap of
things you is done, lak sellin' po' lumber fer good, an' lyin'
'bout de other lumber gempmums, an' ridin' roun' by yo'seff,
exposin' yo'seff ter free issue niggers an' gettin' Mist' Frank
shot, an' not feedin' dem po' convicts nuff ter keep dey souls in
dey bodies.  Ah's done heshed mah mouf, even ef Miss Ellen in de
Promise Lan' wuz sayin' 'Mammy, Mammy!  You ain' look affer mah
chile right!'  Yas'm.  Ah's stood fer all dat but Ah ain' gwine
stand fer dis, Miss Scarlett.  You kain mahy wid trash.  Not w'ile
Ah got breaf in mah body."

"I shall marry whom I please," said Scarlett coldly.  "I think you
are forgetting your place, Mammy."

"An' high time, too!  Ef Ah doan say dese wuds ter you, who gwine
ter do it?"

"I've been thinking the matter over, Mammy, and I've decided that
the best thing for you to do is to go back to Tara.  I'll give you
some money and--"

Mammy drew herself up with all her dignity.

"Ah is free, Miss Scarlett.  You kain sen' me nowhar Ah doan wanter
go.  An' w'en Ah goes back ter Tara, it's gwine be w'en you goes
wid me.  Ah ain' gwine leave Miss Ellen's chile, an' dar ain' no
way in de worl' ter mek me go.  An' Ah ain' gwine leave Miss
Ellen's gran'chillun fer no trashy step-pa ter bring up, needer.
Hyah Ah is and hyah Ah stays!"

"I will not have you staying in my house and being rude to Captain
Butler.  I am going to marry him and there's no more to be said."

"Dar is plen'y mo' ter be said," retorted Mammy slowly and into her
blurred old eyes there came the light of battle.

"But Ah ain' never thought ter say it ter none of Miss Ellen's
blood.  But, Miss Scarlett, lissen ter me.  You ain' nuthin' but a
mule in hawse harness.  You kin polish a mule's feet an' shine his
hide an' put brass all over his harness an' hitch him ter a fine
cah'ige.  But he a mule jes' de same.  He doan fool nobody.  An'
you is jes' de same.  You got silk dresses an' de mills an' de sto'
an' de money, an' you give yo'seff airs lak a fine hawse, but you a
mule jes' de same.  An' you ain' foolin' nobody, needer.  An' dat
Butler man, he come of good stock and he all slicked up lak a race
hawse, but he a mule in hawse harness, jes' lak you."

Mammy bent a piercing look on her mistress.  Scarlett was
speechless and quivering with insult.

"Ef you say you gwine mahy him, you gwine do it, 'cause you is
bullhaided lak yo' pa.  But 'member dis, Miss Scarlett, Ah ain'
leavin' you.  Ah gwine stay right hyah an' see dis ting thoo."

Without waiting for a reply, Mammy turned and left Scarlett and if
she had said:  "Thou shalt see me at Philippi!" her tones would not
have been more ominous.

While they were honeymooning in New Orleans Scarlett told Rhett of
Mammy's words.  To her surprise and indignation he laughed at
Mammy's statement about mules in horse harness.

"I have never heard a profound truth expressed so succinctly," he
said.  "Mammy's a smart old soul and one of the few people I know
whose respect and good will I'd like to have.  But, being a mule, I
suppose I'll never get either from her.  She even refused the ten-
dollar gold piece which I, in my groomlike fervor, wished to
present her after the wedding.  I've seen so few people who did not
melt at the sight of cash.  But she looked me in the eye and
thanked me and said she wasn't a free issue nigger and didn't need
my money."

"Why should she take on so?  Why should everybody gabble about me
like a bunch of guinea hens?  It's my own affair whom I marry and
how often I marry.  I've always minded my own business.  Why don't
other people mind theirs?"

"My pet, the world can forgive practically anything except people
who mind their own business.  But why should you squall like a
scalded cat?  You've said often enough that you didn't mind what
people said about you.  Why not prove it?  You know you've laid
yourself open to criticism so often in small matters, you can't
expect to escape gossip in this large matter.  You knew there'd be
talk if you married a villain like me.  If I were a low-bred
poverty-stricken villain, people wouldn't be so mad.  But a rich,
flourishing villain--of course, that's unforgivable."

"I wish you'd be serious sometimes!"

"I am serious.  It's always annoying to the godly when the ungodly
flourish like the green bay tree.  Cheer up, Scarlett, didn't you
tell me once that the main reason you wanted a lot of money was so
you could tell everybody to go to hell?  Now's your chance."

"But you were the main one I wanted to tell to go to hell," said
Scarlett, and laughed.

"Do you still want to tell me to go to hell?"

"Well, not as often as I used to."

"Do it whenever you like, if it makes you happy."

"It doesn't make me especially happy," said Scarlett and, bending,
she kissed him carelessly.  His dark eyes flickered quickly over
her face, hunting for something in her eyes which he did not find,
and he laughed shortly.

"Forget about Atlanta.  Forget about the old cats.  I brought you
to New Orleans to have fun and I intend that you shall have it."