PART ONE



CHAPTER I


Scarlett O'Hara was not beautiful, but men seldom realized it when
caught by her charm as the Tarleton twins were.  In her face were
too sharply blended the delicate features of her mother, a Coast
aristocrat of French descent, and the heavy ones of her florid
Irish father.  But it was an arresting face, pointed of chin,
square of jaw.  Her eyes were pale green without a touch of hazel,
starred with bristly black lashes and slightly tilted at the ends.
Above them, her thick black brows slanted upward, cutting a
startling oblique line in her magnolia-white skin--that skin so
prized by Southern women and so carefully guarded with bonnets,
veils and mittens against hot Georgia suns.

Seated with Stuart and Brent Tarleton in the cool shade of the
porch of Tara, her father's plantation, that bright April
afternoon of 1861, she made a pretty picture.  Her new green
flowered-muslin dress spread its twelve yards of billowing
material over her hoops and exactly matched the flat-heeled green
morocco slippers her father had recently brought her from Atlanta.
The dress set off to perfection the seventeen-inch waist, the
smallest in three counties, and the tightly fitting basque showed
breasts well matured for her sixteen years.  But for all the
modesty of her spreading skirts, the demureness of hair netted
smoothly into a chignon and the quietness of small white hands
folded in her lap, her true self was poorly concealed.  The green
eyes in the carefully sweet face were turbulent, willful, lusty
with life, distinctly at variance with her decorous demeanor.
Her manners had been imposed upon her by her mother's gentle
admonitions and the sterner discipline of her mammy; her eyes were
her own.

On either side of her, the twins lounged easily in their chairs,
squinting at the sunlight through tall mint-garnished glasses as
they laughed and talked, their long legs, booted to the knee and
thick with saddle muscles, crossed negligently.  Nineteen years
old, six feet two inches tall, long of bone and hard of muscle,
with sunburned faces and deep auburn hair, their eyes merry and
arrogant, their bodies clothed in identical blue coats and
mustard-colored breeches, they were as much alike as two bolls of
cotton.

Outside, the late afternoon sun slanted down in the yard, throwing
into gleaming brightness the dogwood trees that were solid masses
of white blossoms against the background of new green.  The twins'
horses were hitched in the driveway, big animals, red as their
masters' hair; and around the horses' legs quarreled the pack of
lean, nervous possum hounds that accompanied Stuart and Brent
wherever they went.  A little aloof, as became an aristocrat, lay
a black-spotted carriage dog, muzzle on paws, patiently waiting
for the boys to go home to supper.

Between the hounds and the horses and the twins there was a
kinship deeper than that of their constant companionship.  They
were all healthy, thoughtless young animals, sleek, graceful,
high-spirited, the boys as mettlesome as the horses they rode,
mettlesome and dangerous but, withal, sweet-tempered to those who
knew how to handle them.

Although born to the ease of plantation life, waited on hand and
foot since infancy, the faces of the three on the porch were
neither slack nor soft.  They had the vigor and alertness of
country people who have spent all their lives in the open and
troubled their heads very little with dull things in books.  Life
in the north Georgia county of Clayton was still new and,
according to the standards of Augusta, Savannah and Charleston, a
little crude.  The more sedate and older sections of the South
looked down their noses at the up-country Georgians, but here in
north Georgia, a lack of the niceties of classical education
carried no shame, provided a man was smart in the things that
mattered.  And raising good cotton, riding well, shooting
straight, dancing lightly, squiring the ladies with elegance and
carrying one's liquor like a gentleman were the things that
mattered.

In these accomplishments the twins excelled, and they were equally
outstanding in their notorious inability to learn anything
contained between the covers of books.  Their family had more
money, more horses, more slaves than any one else in the County,
but the boys had less grammar than most of their poor Cracker
neighbors.

It was for this precise reason that Stuart and Brent were idling
on the porch of Tara this April afternoon.  They had just been
expelled from the University of Georgia, the fourth university
that had thrown them out in two years; and their older brothers,
Tom and Boyd, had come home with them, because they refused to
remain at an institution where the twins were not welcome.  Stuart
and Brent considered their latest expulsion a fine joke, and
Scarlett, who had not willingly opened a book since leaving the
Fayetteville Female Academy the year before, thought it just as
amusing as they did.

"I know you two don't care about being expelled, or Tom either,"
she said.  "But what about Boyd?  He's kind of set on getting an
education, and you two have pulled him out of the University of
Virginia and Alabama and South Carolina and now Georgia.  He'll
never get finished at this rate."

"Oh, he can read law in Judge Parmalee's office over in
Fayetteville," answered Brent carelessly.  "Besides, it don't
matter much.  We'd have had to come home before the term was out
anyway."

"Why?"

"The war, goose!  The war's going to start any day, and you don't
suppose any of us would stay in college with a war going on, do
you?"

"You know there isn't going to be any war," said Scarlett, bored.
"It's all just talk.  Why, Ashley Wilkes and his father told Pa
just last week that our commissioners in Washington would come
to--to--an--amicable agreement with Mr. Lincoln about the
Confederacy.  And anyway, the Yankees are too scared of us to
fight.  There won't be any war, and I'm tired of hearing about
it."

"Not going to be any war!" cried the twins indignantly, as though
they had been defrauded.

"Why, honey, of course there's going to be a war," said Stuart.
"The Yankees may be scared of us, but after the way General
Beauregard shelled them out of Fort Sumter day before yesterday,
they'll have to fight or stand branded as cowards before the whole
world.  Why, the Confederacy--"

Scarlett made a mouth of bored impatience.

"If you say 'war' just once more, I'll go in the house and shut
the door.  I've never gotten so tired of any one word in my life
as 'war,' unless it's 'secession.'  Pa talks war morning, noon and
night, and all the gentlemen who come to see him shout about Fort
Sumter and States' Rights and Abe Lincoln till I get so bored I
could scream!  And that's all the boys talk about, too, that and
their old Troop.  There hasn't been any fun at any party this
spring because the boys can't talk about anything else.  I'm
mighty glad Georgia waited till after Christmas before it seceded
or it would have ruined the Christmas parties, too.  If you say
'war' again, I'll go in the house."

She meant what she said, for she could never long endure any
conversation of which she was not the chief subject.  But she
smiled when she spoke, consciously deepening her dimple and
fluttering her bristly black lashes as swiftly as butterflies'
wings.  The boys were enchanted, as she had intended them to be,
and they hastened to apologize for boring her.  They thought none
the less of her for her lack of interest.  Indeed, they thought
more.  War was men's business, not ladies', and they took her
attitude as evidence of her femininity.

Having maneuvered them away from the boring subject of war, she
went back with interest to their immediate situation.

"What did your mother say about you two being expelled again?"

The boys looked uncomfortable, recalling their mother's conduct
three months ago when they had come home, by request, from the
University of Virginia.

"Well," said Stuart, "she hasn't had a chance to say anything yet.
Tom and us left home early this morning before she got up, and
Tom's laying out over at the Fontaines' while we came over here."

"Didn't she say anything when you got home last night?"

"We were in luck last night.  Just before we got home that new
stallion Ma got in Kentucky last month was brought in, and the
place was in a stew.  The big brute--he's a grand horse, Scarlett;
you must tell your pa to come over and see him right away--he'd
already bitten a hunk out of his groom on the way down here and
he'd trampled two of Ma's darkies who met the train at Jonesboro.
And just before we got home, he'd about kicked the stable down and
half-killed Strawberry, Ma's old stallion.  When we got home, Ma
was out in the stable with a sackful of sugar smoothing him down
and doing it mighty well, too.  The darkies were hanging from the
rafters, popeyed, they were so scared, but Ma was talking to the
horse like he was folks and he was eating out of her hand.  There
ain't nobody like Ma with a horse.  And when she saw us she said:
'In Heaven's name, what are you four doing home again?  You're
worse than the plagues of Egypt!'  And then the horse began
snorting and rearing and she said:  'Get out of here!  Can't you
see he's nervous, the big darling?  I'll tend to you four in the
morning!'  So we went to bed, and this morning we got away before
she could catch us and left Boyd to handle her."

"Do you suppose she'll hit Boyd?"  Scarlett, like the rest of the
County, could never get used to the way small Mrs. Tarleton
bullied her grown sons and laid her riding crop on their backs if
the occasion seemed to warrant it.

Beatrice Tarleton was a busy woman, having on her hands not only a
large cotton plantation, a hundred negroes and eight children, but
the largest horse-breeding farm in the state as well.  She was
hot-tempered and easily plagued by the frequent scrapes of her
four sons, and while no one was permitted to whip a horse or a
slave, she felt that a lick now and then didn't do the boys any
harm.

"Of course she won't hit Boyd.  She never did beat Boyd much
because he's the oldest and besides he's the runt of the litter,"
said Stuart, proud of his six feet two.  "That's why we left him
at home to explain things to her.  God'lmighty, Ma ought to stop
licking us!  We're nineteen and Tom's twenty-one, and she acts
like we're six years old."

"Will your mother ride the new horse to the Wilkes barbecue
tomorrow?"

"She wants to, but Pa says he's too dangerous.  And, anyway, the
girls won't let her.  They said they were going to have her go to
one party at least like a lady, riding in the carriage."

"I hope it doesn't rain tomorrow," said Scarlett.  "It's rained
nearly every day for a week.  There's nothing worse than a
barbecue turned into an indoor picnic."

"Oh, it'll be clear tomorrow and hot as June," said Stuart.
"Look at that sunset.  I never saw one redder.  You can always
tell weather by sunsets."

They looked out across the endless acres of Gerald O'Hara's newly
plowed cotton fields toward the red horizon.  Now that the sun was
setting in a welter of crimson behind the hills across the Flint
River, the warmth of the April day was ebbing into a faint but
balmy chill.

Spring had come early that year, with warm quick rains and sudden
frothing of pink peach blossoms and dogwood dappling with white
stars the dark river swamp and far-off hills.  Already the plowing
was nearly finished, and the bloody glory of the sunset colored
the fresh-cut furrows of red Georgia clay to even redder hues.
The moist hungry earth, waiting upturned for the cotton seeds,
showed pinkish on the sandy tops of furrows, vermilion and scarlet
and maroon where shadows lay along the sides of the trenches.  The
whitewashed brick plantation house seemed an island set in a wild
red sea, a sea of spiraling, curving, crescent billows petrified
suddenly at the moment when the pink-tipped waves were breaking
into surf.  For here were no long, straight furrows, such as could
be seen in the yellow clay fields of the flat middle Georgia
country or in the lush black earth of the coastal plantations.
The rolling foothill country of north Georgia was plowed in a
million curves to keep the rich earth from washing down into the
river bottoms.

It was a savagely red land, blood-colored after rains, brick dust
in droughts, the best cotton land in the world.  It was a pleasant
land of white houses, peaceful plowed fields and sluggish yellow
rivers, but a land of contrasts, of brightest sun glare and
densest shade.  The plantation clearings and miles of cotton
fields smiled up to a warm sun, placid, complacent.  At their
edges rose the virgin forests, dark and cool even in the hottest
noons, mysterious, a little sinister, the soughing pines seeming
to wait with an age-old patience, to threaten with soft sighs:
"Be careful!  Be careful!  We had you once.  We can take you back
again."

To the ears of the three on the porch came the sounds of hooves,
the jingling of harness chains and the shrill careless laughter
of negro voices, as the field hands and mules came in from the
fields.  From within the house floated the soft voice of
Scarlett's mother, Ellen O'Hara, as she called to the little black
girl who carried her basket of keys.  The high-pitched, childish
voice answered "Yas'm," and there were sounds of footsteps going
out the back way toward the smokehouse where Ellen would ration
out the food to the home-coming hands.  There was the click of
china and the rattle of silver as Pork, the valet-butler of Tara,
laid the table for supper.

At these last sounds, the twins realized it was time they were
starting home.  But they were loath to face their mother and they
lingered on the porch of Tara, momentarily expecting Scarlett to
give them an invitation to supper.

"Look, Scarlett.  About tomorrow," said Brent.  "Just because
we've been away and didn't know about the barbecue and the ball,
that's no reason why we shouldn't get plenty of dances tomorrow
night.  You haven't promised them all, have you?"

"Well, I have!  How did I know you all would be home?  I couldn't
risk being a wallflower just waiting on you two."

"You a wallflower!"  The boys laughed uproariously.

"Look, honey.  You've got to give me the first waltz and Stu the
last one and you've got to eat supper with us.  We'll sit on the
stair landing like we did at the last ball and get Mammy Jincy to
come tell our fortunes again."

"I don't like Mammy Jincy's fortunes.  You know she said I was
going to marry a gentleman with jet-black hair and a long black
mustache, and I don't like black-haired gentlemen."

"You like 'em red-headed, don't you, honey?" grinned Brent.  "Now,
come on, promise us all the waltzes and the supper."

"If you'll promise, we'll tell you a secret," said Stuart.

"What?" cried Scarlett, alert as a child at the word.

"Is it what we heard yesterday in Atlanta, Stu?  If it is, you
know we promised not to tell."

"Well, Miss Pitty told us."

"Miss Who?"

"You know, Ashley Wilkes' cousin who lives in Atlanta, Miss
Pittypat Hamilton--Charles and Melanie Hamilton's aunt."

"I do, and a sillier old lady I never met in all my life."

"Well, when we were in Atlanta yesterday, waiting for the home
train, her carriage went by the depot and she stopped and talked
to us, and she told us there was going to be an engagement
announced tomorrow night at the Wilkes ball."

"Oh.  I know about that," said Scarlett in disappointment.  "That
silly nephew of hers, Charlie Hamilton, and Honey Wilkes.
Everybody's known for years that they'd get married some time,
even if he did seem kind of lukewarm about it."

"Do you think he's silly?" questioned Brent.  "Last Christmas you
sure let him buzz round you plenty."

"I couldn't help him buzzing," Scarlett shrugged negligently.  "I
think he's an awful sissy."

"Besides, it isn't his engagement that's going to be announced,"
said Stuart triumphantly.  "It's Ashley's to Charlie's sister,
Miss Melanie!"

Scarlett's face did not change but her lips went white--like a
person who has received a stunning blow without warning and who,
in the first moments of shock, does not realize what has happened.
So still was her face as she stared at Stuart that he, never
analytic, took it for granted that she was merely surprised and
very interested.

"Miss Pitty told us they hadn't intended announcing it till next
year, because Miss Melly hasn't been very well; but with all the
war talk going around, everybody in both families thought it would
be better to get married soon.  So it's to be announced tomorrow
night at the supper intermission.  Now, Scarlett, we've told you
the secret, so you've got to promise to eat supper with us."

"Of course I will," Scarlett said automatically.

"And all the waltzes?"

"All."

"You're sweet!  I'll bet the other boys will be hopping mad."

"Let 'em be mad," said Brent.  "We two can handle 'em.  Look,
Scarlett.  Sit with us at the barbecue in the morning."

"What?"

Stuart repeated his request.

"Of course."

The twins looked at each other jubilantly but with some surprise.
Although they considered themselves Scarlett's favored suitors,
they had never before gained tokens of this favor so easily.
Usually she made them beg and plead, while she put them off,
refusing to give a Yes or No answer, laughing if they sulked,
growing cool if they became angry.  And here she had practically
promised them the whole of tomorrow--seats by her at the barbecue,
all the waltzes (and they'd see to it that the dances were all
waltzes!) and the supper intermission.  This was worth getting
expelled from the university.

Filled with new enthusiasm by their success, they lingered on,
talking about the barbecue and the ball and Ashley Wilkes and
Melanie Hamilton, interrupting each other, making jokes and
laughing at them, hinting broadly for invitations to supper.  Some
time had passed before they realized that Scarlett was having very
little to say.  The atmosphere had somehow changed.  Just how, the
twins did not know, but the fine glow had gone out of the
afternoon.  Scarlett seemed to be paying little attention to what
they said, although she made the correct answers.  Sensing
something they could not understand, baffled and annoyed by it,
the twins struggled along for a while, and then rose reluctantly,
looking at their watches.

The sun was low across the new-plowed fields and the tall woods
across the river were looming blackly in silhouette.  Chimney
swallows were darting swiftly across the yard, and chickens, ducks
and turkeys were waddling and strutting and straggling in from the
fields.

Stuart bellowed:  "Jeems!"  And after an interval a tall black boy
of their own age ran breathlessly around the house and out toward
the tethered horses.  Jeems was their body servant and, like the
dogs, accompanied them everywhere.  He had been their childhood
playmate and had been given to the twins for their own on their
tenth birthday.  At the sight of him, the Tarleton hounds rose up
out of the red dust and stood waiting expectantly for their
masters.  The boys bowed, shook hands and told Scarlett they'd be
over at the Wilkeses' early in the morning, waiting for her.  Then
they were off down the walk at a rush, mounted their horses and,
followed by Jeems, went down the avenue of cedars at a gallop,
waving their hats and yelling back to her.

When they had rounded the curve of the dusty road that hid them
from Tara, Brent drew his horse to a stop under a clump of
dogwood.  Stuart halted, too, and the darky boy pulled up a few
paces behind them.  The horses, feeling slack reins, stretched
down their necks to crop the tender spring grass, and the patient
hounds lay down again in the soft red dust and looked up longingly
at the chimney swallows circling in the gathering dusk.  Brent's
wide ingenuous face was puzzled and mildly indignant.

"Look," he said.  "Don't it look to you like she would of asked us
to stay for supper?"

"I thought she would," said Stuart.  "I kept waiting for her to do
it, but she didn't.  What do you make of it?"

"I don't make anything of it.  But it just looks to me like she
might of.  After all, it's our first day home and she hasn't seen
us in quite a spell.  And we had lots more things to tell her."

"It looked to me like she was mighty glad to see us when we came."

"I thought so, too."

"And then, about a half-hour ago, she got kind of quiet, like she
had a headache."

"I noticed that but I didn't pay it any mind then.  What do you
suppose ailed her?"

"I dunno.  Do you suppose we said something that made her mad?"

They both thought for a minute.

"I can't think of anything.  Besides, when Scarlett gets mad,
everybody knows it.  She don't hold herself in like some girls
do."

"Yes, that's what I like about her.  She don't go around being
cold and hateful when she's mad--she tells you about it.  But it
was something we did or said that made her shut up talking and
look sort of sick.  I could swear she was glad to see us when we
came and was aiming to ask us to supper."

"You don't suppose it's because we got expelled?"

"Hell, no!  Don't be a fool.  She laughed like everything when we
told her about it.  And besides Scarlett don't set any more store
by book learning than we do."

Brent turned in the saddle and called to the negro groom.

"Jeems!"

"Suh?"

"You heard what we were talking to Miss Scarlett about?"

"Nawsuh, Mist' Brent!  Huccome you think Ah be spyin' on w'ite
folks?"

"Spying, my God!  You darkies know everything that goes on.  Why,
you liar, I saw you with my own eyes sidle round the corner of the
porch and squat in the cape jessamine bush by the wall.  Now, did
you hear us say anything that might have made Miss Scarlett mad--
or hurt her feelings?"

Thus appealed to, Jeems gave up further pretense of not having
overheard the conversation and furrowed his black brow.

"Nawsuh, Ah din' notice y'all say anything ter mek her mad.  Look
ter me lak she sho glad ter see you an' sho had missed you, an'
she cheep along happy as a bird, tell 'bout de time y'all got ter
talkin' 'bout Mist' Ashley an' Miss Melly Hamilton gittin'
mah'ied.  Den she quiet down lak a bird w'en de hawk fly ober."

The twins looked at each other and nodded, but without comprehension.

"Jeems is right.  But I don't see why," said Stuart.  "My Lord!
Ashley don't mean anything to her, 'cept a friend.  She's not
crazy about him.  It's us she's crazy about."

Brent nodded an agreement.

"But do you suppose," he said, "that maybe Ashley hadn't told her
he was going to announce it tomorrow night and she was mad at him
for not telling her, an old friend, before he told everybody else?
Girls set a big store on knowing such things first."

"Well, maybe.  But what if he hadn't told her it was tomorrow?  It
was supposed to be a secret and a surprise, and a man's got a
right to keep his own engagement quiet, hasn't he?  We wouldn't
have known it if Miss Melly's aunt hadn't let it out.  But
Scarlett must have known he was going to marry Miss Melly
sometime.  Why, we've known it for years.  The Wilkes and
Hamiltons always marry their own cousins.  Everybody knew he'd
probably marry her some day, just like Honey Wilkes is going to
marry Miss Melly's brother, Charles."

"Well, I give it up.  But I'm sorry she didn't ask us to supper.
I swear I don't want to go home and listen to Ma take on about us
being expelled.  It isn't as if this was the first time."

"Maybe Boyd will have smoothed her down by now.  You know what a
slick talker that little varmint is.  You know he always can
smooth her down."

"Yes, he can do it, but it takes Boyd time.  He has to talk around
in circles till Ma gets so confused that she gives up and tells
him to save his voice for his law practice.  But he ain't had time
to get good started yet.  Why, I'll bet you Ma is still so excited
about the new horse that she'll never even realize we're home
again till she sits down to supper tonight and sees Boyd.  And
before supper is over she'll be going strong and breathing fire.
And it'll be ten o'clock before Boyd gets a chance to tell her
that it wouldn't have been honorable for any of us to stay in
college after the way the Chancellor talked to you and me.  And
it'll be midnight before he gets her turned around to where she's
so mad at the Chancellor she'll be asking Boyd why he didn't shoot
him.  No, we can't go home till after midnight."

The twins looked at each other glumly.  They were completely
fearless of wild horses, shooting affrays and the indignation of
their neighbors, but they had a wholesome fear of their red-haired
mother's outspoken remarks and the riding crop that she did not
scruple to lay across their breeches.

"Well, look," said Brent.  "Let's go over to the Wilkes.  Ashley
and the girls'll be glad to have us for supper."

Stuart looked a little discomforted.

"No, don't let's go there.  They'll be in a stew getting ready for
the barbecue tomorrow and besides--"

"Oh, I forgot about that," said Brent hastily.  "No, don't let's
go there."

They clucked to their horses and rode along in silence for a
while, a flush of embarrassment on Stuart's brown cheeks.  Until
the previous summer, Stuart had courted India Wilkes with the
approbation of both families and the entire County.  The County
felt that perhaps the cool and contained India Wilkes would have a
quieting effect on him.  They fervently hoped so, at any rate.
And Stuart might have made the match, but Brent had not been
satisfied.  Brent liked India but he thought her mighty plain and
tame, and he simply could not fall in love with her himself to
keep Stuart company.  That was the first time the twins' interest
had ever diverged, and Brent was resentful of his brother's
attentions to a girl who seemed to him not at all remarkable.

Then, last summer at a political speaking in a grove of oak trees
at Jonesboro, they both suddenly became aware of Scarlett O'Hara.
They had known her for years, and, since their childhood, she had
been a favorite playmate, for she could ride horses and climb
trees almost as well as they.  But now to their amazement she had
become a grown-up young lady and quite the most charming one in
all the world.

They noticed for the first time how her green eyes danced, how
deep her dimples were when she laughed, how tiny her hands and
feet and what a small waist she had.  Their clever remarks sent
her into merry peals of laughter and, inspired by the thought that
she considered them a remarkable pair, they fairly outdid
themselves.

It was a memorable day in the life of the twins.  Thereafter, when
they talked it over, they always wondered just why they had failed
to notice Scarlett's charms before.  They never arrived at the
correct answer, which was that Scarlett on that day had decided to
make them notice.  She was constitutionally unable to endure any
man being in love with any woman not herself, and the sight of
India Wilkes and Stuart at the speaking had been too much for her
predatory nature.  Not content with Stuart alone, she had set her
cap for Brent as well, and with a thoroughness that overwhelmed
the two of them.

Now they were both in love with her, and India Wilkes and Letty
Munroe, from Lovejoy, whom Brent had been half-heartedly courting,
were far in the back of their minds.  Just what the loser would
do, should Scarlett accept either one of them, the twins did not
ask.  They would cross that bridge when they came to it.  For the
present they were quite satisfied to be in accord again about one
girl, for they had no jealousies between them.  It was a situation
which interested the neighbors and annoyed their mother, who had
no liking for Scarlett.

"It will serve you right if that sly piece does accept one of
you," she said.  "Or maybe she'll accept both of you, and then
you'll have to move to Utah, if the Mormons'll have you--which I
doubt. . . .  All that bothers me is that some one of these days
you're both going to get lickered up and jealous of each other
about that two-faced, little, green-eyed baggage, and you'll shoot
each other.  But that might not be a bad idea either."

Since the day of the speaking, Stuart had been uncomfortable in
India's presence.  Not that India ever reproached him or even
indicated by look or gesture that she was aware of his abruptly
changed allegiance.  She was too much of a lady.  But Stuart felt
guilty and ill at ease with her.  He knew he had made India love
him and he knew that she still loved him and, deep in his heart,
he had the feeling that he had not played the gentleman.  He still
liked her tremendously and respected her for her cool good
breeding, her book learning and all the sterling qualities she
possessed.  But, damn it, she was just so pallid and uninteresting
and always the same, beside Scarlett's bright and changeable
charm.  You always knew where you stood with India and you never
had the slightest notion with Scarlett.  That was enough to drive
a man to distraction, but it had its charm.

"Well, let's go over to Cade Calvert's and have supper.  Scarlett
said Cathleen was home from Charleston.  Maybe she'll have some
news about Fort Sumter that we haven't heard."

"Not Cathleen.  I'll lay you two to one she didn't even know the
fort was out there in the harbor, much less that it was full of
Yankees until we shelled them out.  All she'll know about is the
balls she went to and the beaux she collected."

"Well, it's fun to hear her gabble.  And it'll be somewhere to
hide out till Ma has gone to bed."

"Well, hell!  I like Cathleen and she is fun and I'd like to hear
about Caro Rhett and the rest of the Charleston folks; but I'm
damned if I can stand sitting through another meal with that
Yankee stepmother of hers."

"Don't be too hard on her, Stuart.  She means well."

"I'm not being hard on her.  I feel sorry for her, but I don't
like people I've got to feel sorry for.  And she fusses around so
much, trying to do the right thing and make you feel at home, that
she always manages to say and do just exactly the wrong thing.
She gives me the fidgets!  And she thinks Southerners are wild
barbarians.  She even told Ma so.  She's afraid of Southerners.
Whenever we're there she always looks scared to death.  She
reminds me of a skinny hen perched on a chair, her eyes kind of
bright and blank and scared, all ready to flap and squawk at the
slightest move anybody makes."

"Well, you can't blame her.  You did shoot Cade in the leg."

"Well, I was lickered up or I wouldn't have done it," said Stuart.
"And Cade never had any hard feelings.  Neither did Cathleen or
Raiford or Mr. Calvert.  It was just that Yankee stepmother who
squalled and said I was a wild barbarian and decent people weren't
safe around uncivilized Southerners."

"Well, you can't blame her.  She's a Yankee and ain't got very
good manners; and, after all, you did shoot him and he is her
stepson."

"Well, hell!  That's no excuse for insulting me!  You are Ma's own
blood son, but did she take on that time Tony Fontaine shot you in
the leg?  No, she just sent for old Doc Fontaine to dress it and
asked the doctor what ailed Tony's aim.  Said she guessed licker
was spoiling his marksmanship.  Remember how mad that made Tony?"

Both boys yelled with laughter.

"Ma's a card!" said Brent with loving approval.  "You can always
count on her to do the right thing and not embarrass you in front
of folks."

"Yes, but she's mighty liable to talk embarrassing in front of
Father and the girls when we get home tonight," said Stuart
gloomily.  "Look, Brent.  I guess this means we don't go to
Europe.  You know Mother said if we got expelled from another
college we couldn't have our Grand Tour."

"Well, hell!  We don't care, do we?  What is there to see in
Europe?  I'll bet those foreigners can't show us a thing we
haven't got right here in Georgia.  I'll bet their horses aren't
as fast or their girls as pretty, and I know damn well they
haven't got any rye whisky that can touch Father's."

"Ashley Wilkes said they had an awful lot of scenery and music.
Ashley liked Europe.  He's always talking about it."

"Well--you know how the Wilkes are.  They are kind of queer about
music and books and scenery.  Mother says it's because their
grandfather came from Virginia.  She says Virginians set quite a
store by such things."

"They can have 'em.  Give me a good horse to ride and some good
licker to drink and a good girl to court and a bad girl to have
fun with and anybody can have their Europe. . . .  What do we care
about missing the Tour?  Suppose we were in Europe now, with the
war coming on?  We couldn't get home soon enough.  I'd heap rather
go to a war than go to Europe."

"So would I, any day. . . .  Look, Brent!  I know where we can go
for supper.  Let's ride across the swamp to Abel Wynder's place
and tell him we're all four home again and ready for drill."

"That's an idea!" cried Brent with enthusiasm.  "And we can hear
all the news of the Troop and find out what color they finally
decided on for the uniforms."

"If it's Zouave, I'm damned if I'll go in the troop.  I'd feel
like a sissy in those baggy red pants.  They look like ladies' red
flannel drawers to me."

"Is y'all aimin' ter go ter Mist' Wynder's?  'Cause ef you is, you
ain' gwine git much supper," said Jeems.  "Dey cook done died, an'
dey ain' bought a new one.  Dey got a fe'el han' cookin', an' de
niggers tells me she is de wustest cook in de state."

"Good God!  Why don't they buy another cook?"

"Huccome po' w'ite trash buy any niggers?  Dey ain' never owned
mo'n fo' at de mostes'."

There was frank contempt in Jeems' voice.  His own social status
was assured because the Tarletons owned a hundred negroes and,
like all slaves of large planters, he looked down on small farmers
whose slaves were few.

"I'm going to beat your hide off for that," cried Stuart fiercely.
Don't you call Abel Wynder 'po' white.'  Sure he's poor, but he
ain't trash; and I'm damned if I'll have any man, darky or white,
throwing off on him.  There ain't a better man in this County, or
why else did the Troop elect him lieutenant?"

"Ah ain' never figgered dat out, mahseff," replied Jeems,
undisturbed by his master's scowl.  "Look ter me lak dey'd 'lect
all de awficers frum rich gempmum, 'stead of swamp trash."

"He ain't trash!  Do you mean to compare him with real white trash
like the Slatterys?  Able just ain't rich.  He's a small farmer,
not a big planter, and if the boys thought enough of him to elect
him lieutenant, then it's not for any darky to talk impudent about
him.  The Troop knows what it's doing."

The troop of cavalry had been organized three months before, the
very day that Georgia seceded from the Union, and since then the
recruits had been whistling for war.  The outfit was as yet
unnamed, though not for want of suggestions.  Everyone had his own
idea on that subject and was loath to relinquish it, just as
everyone had ideas about the color and cut of the uniforms.
"Clayton Wild Cats," "Fire Eaters," "North Georgia Hussars,"
"Zouaves," "The Inland Rifles" (although the Troop was to be armed
with pistols, sabers and bowie knives, and not with rifles), "The
Clayton Grays," "The Blood and Thunderers," "The Rough and
Readys," all had their adherents.  Until matters were settled,
everyone referred to the organization as the Troop and, despite
the high-sounding name finally adopted, they were known to the end
of their usefulness simply as "The Troop."

The officers were elected by the members, for no one in the County
had had any military experience except a few veterans of the
Mexican and Seminole wars and, besides, the Troop would have
scorned a veteran as a leader if they had not personally liked him
and trusted him.  Everyone liked the four Tarleton boys and the
three Fontaines, but regretfully refused to elect them, because
the Tarletons got lickered up too quickly and liked to skylark,
and the Fontaines had such quick, murderous tempers.  Ashley
Wilkes was elected captain, because he was the best rider in the
County and because his cool head was counted on to keep some
semblance of order.  Raiford Calvert was made first lieutenant,
because everybody liked Raif, and Able Wynder, son of a swamp
trapper, himself a small farmer, was elected second lieutenant.

Abel was a shrewd, grave giant, illiterate, kind of heart, older
than the other boys and with as good or better manners in the
presence of ladies.  There was little snobbery in the Troop.  Too
many of their fathers and grandfathers had come up to wealth from
the small farmer class for that.  Moreover, Able was the best shot
in the Troop, a real sharpshooter who could pick out the eye of a
squirrel at seventy-five yards, and, too, he knew all about living
outdoors, building fires in the rain, tracking animals and finding
water.  The Troop bowed to real worth and moreover, because they
liked him, they made him an officer.  He bore the honor gravely
and with no untoward conceit, as though it were only his due.  But
the planters' ladies and the planters' slaves could not overlook
the fact that he was not born a gentleman, even if their men folks
could.

In the beginning, the Troop had been recruited exclusively from
the sons of planters, a gentleman's outfit, each man supplying his
own horse, arms, equipment, uniform and body servant.  But rich
planters were few in the young county of Clayton, and, in order to
muster a full-strength troop, it had been necessary to raise more
recruits among the sons of small farmers, hunters in the
backwoods, swamp trappers, Crackers and, in a very few cases, even
poor whites, if they were above the average of their class.

These latter young men were as anxious to fight the Yankees,
should war come, as were their richer neighbors; but the delicate
question of money arose.  Few small farmers owned horses.  They
carried on their farm operations with mules and they had no
surplus of these, seldom more than four.  The mules could not be
spared to go off to war, even if they had been acceptable for the
Troop, which they emphatically were not.  As for the poor whites,
they considered themselves well off if they owned one mule.  The
backwoods folks and the swamp dwellers owned neither horses nor
mules.  They lived entirely off the produce of their lands and the
game in the swamp, conducting their business generally by the
barter system and seldom seeing five dollars in cash a year, and
horses and uniforms were out of their reach.  But they were as
fiercely proud in their poverty as the planters were in their
wealth, and they would accept nothing that smacked of charity from
their rich neighbors.  So, to save the feelings of all and to
bring the Troop up to full strength, Scarlett's father, John
Wilkes, Buck Munroe, Jim Tarleton, Hugh Calvert, in fact every
large planter in the County with the one exception of Angus
MacIntosh, had contributed money to completely outfit the Troop,
horse and man.  The upshot of the matter was that every planter
agreed to pay for equipping his own sons and a certain number of
the others, but the manner of handling the arrangements was such
that the less wealthy members of the outfit could accept horses
and uniforms without offense to their honor.

The Troop met twice a week in Jonesboro to drill and to pray for
the war to begin.  Arrangements had not yet been completed for
obtaining the full quota of horses, but those who had horses
performed what they imagined to be cavalry maneuvers in the field
behind the courthouse, kicked up a great deal of dust, yelled
themselves hoarse and waved the Revolutionary-war swords that had
been taken down from parlor walls.  Those who, as yet, had no
horses sat on the curb in front of Bullard's store and watched
their mounted comrades, chewed tobacco and told yarns.  Or else
engaged in shooting matches.  There was no need to teach any of
the men to shoot.  Most Southerners were born with guns in their
hands, and lives spent in hunting had made marksmen of them all.

From planters' homes and swamp cabins, a varied array of firearms
came to each muster.  There were long squirrel guns that had been
new when first the Alleghenies were crossed, old muzzle-loaders
that had claimed many an Indian when Georgia was new, horse
pistols that had seen service in 1812, in the Seminole wars and in
Mexico, silver-mounted dueling pistols, pocket derringers, double-
barreled hunting pieces and handsome new rifles of English make
with shining stocks of fine wood.

Drill always ended in the saloons of Jonesboro, and by nightfall
so many fights had broken out that the officers were hard put to
ward off casualties until the Yankees could inflict them.  It was
during one of these brawls that Stuart Tarleton had shot Cade
Calvert and Tony Fontaine had shot Brent.  The twins had been at
home, freshly expelled from the University of Virginia, at the
time the Troop was organized and they had joined enthusiastically;
but after the shooting episode, two months ago, their mother had
packed them off to the state university, with orders to stay
there.  They had sorely missed the excitement of the drills while
away, and they counted education well lost if only they could ride
and yell and shoot off rifles in the company of their friends.

"Well, let's cut across country to Abel's," suggested Brent.  "We
can go through Mr. O'Hara's river bottom and the Fontaine's
pasture and get there in no time."

"We ain' gwine git nothin' ter eat 'cept possum an' greens,"
argued Jeems.

"You ain't going to get anything," grinned Stuart.  "Because you
are going home and tell Ma that we won't be home for supper."

"No, Ah ain'!" cried Jeems in alarm.  "No, Ah ain'!  Ah doan git
no mo' fun outer havin' Miss Beetriss lay me out dan y'all does.
Fust place she'll ast me huccome Ah let y'all git expelled agin.
An' nex' thing, huccome Ah din' bring y'all home ternight so she
could lay you out.  An' den she'll light on me lak a duck on a
June bug, an' fust thing Ah know Ah'll be ter blame fer it all.
Ef y'all doan tek me ter Mist' Wynder's, Ah'll lay out in de woods
all night an' maybe de patterollers git me, 'cause Ah heap ruther
de patterollers git me dan Miss Beetriss when she in a state."

The twins looked at the determined black boy in perplexity and
indignation.

"He'd be just fool enough to let the patterollers get him and that
would give Ma something else to talk about for weeks.  I swear,
darkies are more trouble.  Sometimes I think the Abolitionists
have got the right idea."

"Well, it wouldn't be right to make Jeems face what we don't want
to face.  We'll have to take him.  But, look, you impudent black
fool, if you put on any airs in front of the Wynder darkies and
hint that we all the time have fried chicken and ham, while they
don't have nothing but rabbit and possum, I'll--I'll tell Ma.  And
we won't let you go to the war with us, either."

"Airs?  Me put on airs fo' dem cheap niggers?  Nawsuh, Ah got
better manners.  Ain' Miss Beetriss taught me manners same as she
taught y'all?"

"She didn't do a very good job on any of the three of us," said
Stuart.  "Come on, let's get going."

He backed his big red horse and then, putting spurs to his side,
lifted him easily over the split rail fence into the soft field of
Gerald O'Hara's plantation.  Brent's horse followed and then
Jeems', with Jeems clinging to pommel and mane.  Jeems did not
like to jump fences, but he had jumped higher ones than this in
order to keep up with his masters.

As they picked their way across the red furrows and down the hill
to the river bottom in the deepening dusk, Brent yelled to his
brother:

"Look, Stu!  Don't it seem like to you that Scarlett WOULD have
asked us to supper?"

"I kept thinking she would," yelled Stuart.  "Why do you
suppose . . ."



CHAPTER II


When the twins left Scarlett standing on the porch of Tara and the
last sound of flying hooves had died away, she went back to her
chair like a sleepwalker.  Her face felt stiff as from pain and
her mouth actually hurt from having stretched it, unwillingly, in
smiles to prevent the twins from learning her secret.  She sat
down wearily, tucking one foot under her, and her heart swelled up
with misery, until it felt too large for her bosom.  It beat with
odd little jerks; her hands were cold, and a feeling of disaster
oppressed her.  There were pain and bewilderment in her face, the
bewilderment of a pampered child who has always had her own way
for the asking and who now, for the first time, was in contact
with the unpleasantness of life.

Ashley to marry Melanie Hamilton!

Oh, it couldn't be true!  The twins were mistaken.  They were
playing one of their jokes on her.  Ashley couldn't, couldn't be
in love with her.  Nobody could, not with a mousy little person
like Melanie.  Scarlett recalled with contempt Melanie's thin
childish figure, her serious heart-shaped face that was plain
almost to homeliness.  And Ashley couldn't have seen her in
months.  He hadn't been in Atlanta more than twice since the house
party he gave last year at Twelve Oaks.  No, Ashley couldn't be in
love with Melanie, because--oh, she couldn't be mistaken!--because
he was in love with her!  She, Scarlett, was the one he loved--she
knew it!

Scarlett heard Mammy's lumbering tread shaking the floor of the
hall and she hastily untucked her foot and tried to rearrange her
face in more placid lines.  It would never do for Mammy to suspect
that anything was wrong.  Mammy felt that she owned the O'Haras,
body and soul, that their secrets were her secrets; and even a
hint of a mystery was enough to set her upon the trail as
relentlessly as a bloodhound.  Scarlett knew from experience that,
if Mammy's curiosity were not immediately satisfied, she would
take up the matter with Ellen, and then Scarlett would be forced
to reveal everything to her mother, or think up some plausible
lie.

Mammy emerged from the hall, a huge old woman with the small,
shrewd eyes of an elephant.  She was shining black, pure African,
devoted to her last drop of blood to the O'Haras, Ellen's
mainstay, the despair of her three daughters, the terror of the
other house servants.  Mammy was black, but her code of conduct
and her sense of pride were as high as or higher than those of her
owners.  She had been raised in the bedroom of Solange Robillard,
Ellen O'Hara's mother, a dainty, cold, high-nosed French-woman,
who spared neither her children nor her servants their just
punishment for any infringement of decorum.  She had been Ellen's
mammy and had come with her from Savannah to the up-country when
she married.  Whom Mammy loved, she chastened.  And, as her love
for Scarlett and her pride in her were enormous, the chastening
process was practically continuous.

"Is de gempmum gone?  Huccome you din' ast dem ter stay fer
supper, Miss Scarlett?  Ah done tole Poke ter lay two extry plates
fer dem.  Whar's yo' manners?"

"Oh, I was so tired of hearing them talk about the war that I
couldn't have endured it through supper, especially with Pa
joining in and shouting about Mr. Lincoln."

"You ain' got no mo' manners dan a fe'el han', an' after Miss
Ellen an' me done labored wid you.  An' hyah you is widout yo'
shawl!  An' de night air fixin' ter set in!  Ah done tole you an'
tole you 'bout gittin' fever frum settin' in de night air wid
nuthin' on yo' shoulders.  Come on in de house, Miss Scarlett."

Scarlett turned away from Mammy with studied nonchalance, thankful
that her face had been unnoticed in Mammy's preoccupation with the
matter of the shawl.

"No, I want to sit here and watch the sunset.  It's so pretty.
You run get my shawl.  Please, Mammy, and I'll sit here till Pa
comes home."

"Yo' voice soun' lak you catchin' a cole," said Mammy suspiciously.

"Well, I'm not," said Scarlett impatiently.  "You fetch me my
shawl."

Mammy waddled back into the hall and Scarlett heard her call
softly up the stairwell to the upstairs maid.

"You, Rosa!  Drap me Miss Scarlett's shawl."  Then, more loudly:
"Wuthless nigger!  She ain' never whar she does nobody no good.
Now, Ah got ter climb up an' git it mahseff."

Scarlett heard the stairs groan and she got softly to her feet.
When Mammy returned she would resume her lecture on Scarlett's
breach of hospitality, and Scarlett felt that she could not endure
prating about such a trivial matter when her heart was breaking.
As she stood, hesitant, wondering where she could hide until the
ache in her breast subsided a little, a thought came to her,
bringing a small ray of hope.  Her father had ridden over to
Twelve Oaks, the Wilkes plantation, that afternoon to offer to buy
Dilcey, the broad wife of his valet, Pork.  Dilcey was head woman
and midwife at Twelve Oaks, and, since the marriage six months
ago, Pork had deviled his master night and day to buy Dilcey, so
the two could live on the same plantation.  That afternoon,
Gerald, his resistance worn thin, had set out to make an offer for
Dilcey.

Surely, thought Scarlett, Pa will know whether this awful story is
true.  Even if he hasn't actually heard anything this afternoon,
perhaps he's noticed something, sensed some excitement in the
Wilkes family.  If I can just see him privately before supper,
perhaps I'll find out the truth--that it's just one of the twins'
nasty practical jokes.

It was time for Gerald's return and, if she expected to see him
alone, there was nothing for her to do except meet him where the
driveway entered the road.  She went quietly down the front steps,
looking carefully over her shoulder to make sure Mammy was not
observing her from the upstairs windows.  Seeing no broad black
face, turbaned in snowy white, peering disapprovingly from between
fluttering curtains, she boldly snatched up her green flowered
skirts and sped down the path toward the driveway as fast as her
small ribbon-laced slippers would carry her.

The dark cedars on either side of the graveled drive met in an
arch overhead, turning the long avenue into a dim tunnel.  As soon
as she was beneath the gnarled arms of the cedars, she knew she
was safe from observation from the house and she slowed her swift
pace.  She was panting, for her stays were laced too tightly to
permit much running, but she walked on as rapidly as she could.
Soon she was at the end of the driveway and out on the main road,
but she did not stop until she had rounded a curve that put a
large clump of trees between her and the house.

Flushed and breathing hard, she sat down on a stump to wait for
her father.  It was past time for him to come home, but she was
glad that he was late.  The delay would give her time to quiet her
breathing and calm her face so that his suspicions would not be
aroused.  Every moment she expected to hear the pounding of his
horse's hooves and see him come charging up the hill at his usual
breakneck speed.  But the minutes slipped by and Gerald did not
come.  She looked down the road for him, the pain in her heart
swelling up again.

"Oh, it can't be true!" she thought.  "Why doesn't he come?"

Her eyes followed the winding road, blood-red now after the
morning rain.  In her thought she traced its course as it ran down
the hill to the sluggish Flint River, through the tangled swampy
bottoms and up the next hill to Twelve Oaks where Ashley lived.
That was all the road meant now--a road to Ashley and the
beautiful white-columned house that crowned the hill like a Greek
Temple.

"Oh, Ashley!  Ashley!" she thought, and her heart beat faster.

Some of the cold sense of bewilderment and disaster that had
weighted her down since the Tarleton boys told her their gossip
was pushed into the background of her mind, and in its place crept
the fever that had possessed her for two years.

It seemed strange now that when she was growing up Ashley had
never seemed so very attractive to her.  In childhood days, she
had seen him come and go and never given him a thought.  But since
that day two years ago when Ashley, newly home from his three
years' Grand Tour in Europe, had called to pay his respects, she
had loved him.  It was as simple as that.

She had been on the front porch and he had ridden up the long
avenue, dressed in gray broadcloth with a wide black cravat
setting off his frilled shirt to perfection.  Even now, she could
recall each detail of his dress, how brightly his boots shone, the
head of a Medusa in cameo on his cravat pin, the wide Panama hat
that was instantly in his hand when he saw her.  He had alighted
and tossed his bridle reins to a pickaninny and stood looking up
at her, his drowsy gray eyes wide with a smile and the sun so
bright on his blond hair that it seemed like a cap of shining
silver.  And he said, "So you've grown up, Scarlett."  And, coming
lightly up the steps, he had kissed her hand.  And his voice!  She
would never forget the leap of her heart as she heard it, as if
for the first time, drawling, resonant, musical.

She had wanted him, in that first instant, wanted him as simply
and unreasoningly as she wanted food to eat, horses to ride and a
soft bed on which to lay herself.

For two years he had squired her about the County, to balls, fish
fries, picnics and court days, never so often as the Tarleton
twins or Cade Calvert, never so importunate as the younger
Fontaine boys, but, still, never the week went by that Ashley did
not come calling at Tara.

True, he never made love to her, nor did the clear gray eyes ever
glow with that hot light Scarlett knew so well in other men.  And
yet--and yet--she knew he loved her.  She could not be mistaken
about it.  Instinct stronger than reason and knowledge born of
experience told her that he loved her.  Too often she had
surprised him when his eyes were neither drowsy nor remote, when
he looked at her with a yearning and a sadness which puzzled her.
She KNEW he loved her.  Why did he not tell her so?  That she
could not understand.  But there were so many things about him
that she did not understand.

He was courteous always, but aloof, remote.  No one could ever
tell what he was thinking about, Scarlett least of all.  In a
neighborhood where everyone said exactly what he thought as soon
as he thought it, Ashley's quality of reserve was exasperating.
He was as proficient as any of the other young men in the usual
County diversions, hunting, gambling, dancing and politics, and
was the best rider of them all; but he differed from all the rest
in that these pleasant activities were not the end and aim of life
to him.  And he stood alone in his interest in books and music and
his fondness for writing poetry.

Oh, why was he so handsomely blond, so courteously aloof, so
maddeningly boring with his talk about Europe and books and music
and poetry and things that interested her not at all--and yet so
desirable?  Night after night, when Scarlett went to bed after
sitting on the front porch in the semi-darkness with him, she
tossed restlessly for hours and comforted herself only with the
thought that the very next time he saw her he certainly would
propose.  But the next time came and went, and the result was
nothing--nothing except that the fever possessing her rose higher
and hotter.

She loved him and she wanted him and she did not understand him.
She was as forthright and simple as the winds that blew over Tara
and the yellow river that wound about it, and to the end of her
days she would never be able to understand a complexity.  And now,
for the first time in her life, she was facing a complex nature.

For Ashley was born of a line of men who used their leisure for
thinking, not doing, for spinning brightly colored dreams that had
in them no touch of reality.  He moved in an inner world that was
more beautiful than Georgia and came back to reality with
reluctance.  He looked on people, and he neither liked nor
disliked them.  He looked on life and was neither heartened nor
saddened.  He accepted the universe and his place in it for what
they were and, shrugging, turned to his music and books and his
better world.

Why he should have captivated Scarlett when his mind was a
stranger to hers she did not know.  The very mystery of him
excited her curiosity like a door that had neither lock nor key.
The things about him which she could not understand only made her
love him more, and his odd, restrained courtship only served to
increase her determination to have him for her own.  That he would
propose some day she had never doubted, for she was too young and
too spoiled ever to have known defeat.  And now, like a thunderclap,
had come this horrible news.  Ashley to marry Melanie!  It couldn't
be true!

Why, only last week, when they were riding home at twilight from
Fairhill, he had said:  "Scarlett, I have something so important
to tell you that I hardly know how to say it."

She had cast down her eyes demurely, her heart beating with wild
pleasure, thinking the happy moment had come.  Then he had said:
"Not now!  We're nearly home and there isn't time.  Oh, Scarlett,
what a coward I am!"  And putting spurs to his horse, he had raced
her up the hill to Tara.

Scarlett, sitting on the stump, thought of those words which had
made her so happy, and suddenly they took on another meaning, a
hideous meaning.  Suppose it was the news of his engagement he had
intended to tell her!

Oh, if Pa would only come home!  She could not endure the suspense
another moment.  She looked impatiently down the road again, and
again she was disappointed.

The sun was now below the horizon and the red glow at the rim of
the world faded into pink.  The sky above turned slowly from azure
to the delicate blue-green of a robin's egg, and the unearthly
stillness of rural twilight came stealthily down about her.
Shadowy dimness crept over the countryside.  The red furrows and
the gashed red road lost their magical blood color and became
plain brown earth.  Across the road, in the pasture, the horses,
mules and cows stood quietly with heads over the split-rail fence,
waiting to be driven to the stables and supper.  They did not like
the dark shade of the thickets hedging the pasture creek, and they
twitched their ears at Scarlett as if appreciative of human
companionship.

In the strange half-light, the tall pines of the river swamp, so
warmly green in the sunshine, were black against the pastel sky,
an impenetrable row of black giants hiding the slow yellow water
at their feet.  On the hill across the river, the tall white
chimneys of the Wilkes' home faded gradually into the darkness of
the thick oaks surrounding them, and only far-off pin points of
supper lamps showed that a house was here.  The warm damp
balminess of spring encompassed her sweetly with the moist smells
of new-plowed earth and all the fresh green things pushing up to
the air.

Sunset and spring and new-fledged greenery were no miracle to
Scarlett.  Their beauty she accepted as casually as the air she
breathed and the water she drank, for she had never consciously
seen beauty in anything but women's faces, horses, silk dresses
and like tangible things.  Yet the serene half-light over Tara's
well-kept acres brought a measure of quiet to her disturbed mind.
She loved this land so much, without even knowing she loved it,
loved it as she loved her mother's face under the lamp at prayer
time.

Still there was no sign of Gerald on the quiet winding road.  If
she had to wait much longer, Mammy would certainly come in search
of her and bully her into the house.  But even as she strained her
eyes down the darkening road, she heard a pounding of hooves at
the bottom of the pasture hill and saw the horses and cows scatter
in fright.  Gerald O'Hara was coming home across country and at
top speed.

He came up the hill at a gallop on his thick-barreled, long-legged
hunter, appearing in the distance like a boy on a too large horse.
His long white hair standing out behind him, he urged the horse
forward with crop and loud cries.

Filled with her own anxieties, she nevertheless watched him with
affectionate pride, for Gerald was an excellent horseman.

"I wonder why he always wants to jump fences when he's had a few
drinks," she thought.  "And after that fall he had right here last
year when he broke his knee.  You'd think he'd learn.  Especially
when he promised Mother on oath he'd never jump again."

Scarlett had no awe of her father and felt him more her contemporary
than her sisters, for jumping fences and keeping it a secret from
his wife gave him a boyish pride and guilty glee that matched her
own pleasure in outwitting Mammy.  She rose from her seat to watch
him.

The big horse reached the fence, gathered himself and soared over
as effortlessly as a bird, his rider yelling enthusiastically, his
crop beating the air, his white curls jerking out behind him.
Gerald did not see his daughter in the shadow of the trees, and he
drew rein in the road, patting his horse's neck with approbation.

"There's none in the County can touch you, nor in the state," he
informed his mount, with pride, the brogue of County Meath still
heavy on his tongue in spite of thirty-nine years in America.
Then he hastily set about smoothing his hair and settling his
ruffled shirt and his cravat which had slipped awry behind one
ear.  Scarlett knew these hurried preenings were being made with
an eye toward meeting his wife with the appearance of a gentleman
who had ridden sedately home from a call on a neighbor.  She knew
also that he was presenting her with just the opportunity she
wanted for opening the conversation without revealing her true
purpose.

She laughed aloud.  As she had intended, Gerald was startled by
the sound; then he recognized her, and a look both sheepish and
defiant came over his florid face.  He dismounted with difficulty,
because his knee was stiff, and, slipping the reins over his arm,
stumped toward her.

"Well, Missy," he said, pinching her cheek, "so, you've been
spying on me and, like your sister Suellen last week, you'll be
telling your mother on me?"

There was indignation in his hoarse bass voice but also a
wheedling note, and Scarlett teasingly clicked her tongue against
her teeth as she reached out to pull his cravat into place.  His
breath in her face was strong with Bourbon whisky mingled with a
faint fragrance of mint.  Accompanying him also were the smells of
chewing tobacco, well-oiled leather and horses--a combination of
odors that she always associated with her father and instinctively
liked in other men.

"No, Pa, I'm no tattletale like Suellen," she assured him,
standing off to view his rearranged attire with a judicious air.

Gerald was a small man, little more than five feet tall, but so
heavy of barrel and thick of neck that his appearance, when
seated, led strangers to think him a larger man.  His thickset
torso was supported by short sturdy legs, always incased in the
finest leather boots procurable and always planted wide apart like
a swaggering small boy's.  Most small people who take themselves
seriously are a little ridiculous; but the bantam cock is
respected in the barnyard, and so it was with Gerald.  No one
would ever have the temerity to think of Gerald O'Hara as a
ridiculous little figure.

He was sixty years old and his crisp curly hair was silver-white,
but his shrewd face was unlined and his hard little blue eyes were
young with the unworried youthfulness of one who has never taxed
his brain with problems more abstract than how many cards to draw
in a poker game.  His was as Irish a face as could be found in the
length and breadth of the homeland he had left so long ago--round,
high colored, short nosed, wide mouthed and belligerent.

Beneath his choleric exterior Gerald O'Hara had the tenderest of
hearts.  He could not bear to see a slave pouting under a
reprimand, no matter how well deserved, or hear a kitten mewing or
a child crying; but he had a horror of having this weakness
discovered.  That everyone who met him did discover his kindly
heart within five minutes was unknown to him; and his vanity would
have suffered tremendously if he had found it out, for he liked to
think that when he bawled orders at the top of his voice everyone
trembled and obeyed.  It had never occurred to him that only one
voice was obeyed on the plantation--the soft voice of his wife
Ellen.  It was a secret he would never learn, for everyone from
Ellen down to the stupidest field hand was in a tacit and kindly
conspiracy to keep him believing that his word was law.

Scarlett was impressed less than anyone else by his tempers and
his roarings.  She was his oldest child and, now that Gerald knew
there would be no more sons to follow the three who lay in the
family burying ground, he had drifted into a habit of treating her
in a man-to-man manner which she found most pleasant.  She was
more like her father than her younger sisters, for Carreen, who
had been born Caroline Irene, was delicate and dreamy, and
Suellen, christened Susan Elinor, prided herself on her elegance
and ladylike deportment.

Moreover, Scarlett and her father were bound together by a mutual
suppression agreement.  If Gerald caught her climbing a fence
instead of walking half a mile to a gate, or sitting too late on
the front steps with a beau, he castigated her personally and with
vehemence, but he did not mention the fact to Ellen or to Mammy.
And when Scarlett discovered him jumping fences after his solemn
promise to his wife, or learned the exact amount of his losses at
poker, as she always did from County gossip, she refrained from
mentioning the fact at the supper table in the artfully artless
manner Suellen had.  Scarlett and her father each assured the
other solemnly that to bring such matters to the ears of Ellen
would only hurt her, and nothing would induce them to wound her
gentleness.

Scarlett looked at her father in the fading light, and, without
knowing why, she found it comforting to be in his presence.  There
was something vital and earthy and coarse about him that appealed
to her.  Being the least analytic of people, she did not realize
that this was because she possessed in some degree these same
qualities, despite sixteen years of effort on the part of Ellen
and Mammy to obliterate them.

"You look very presentable now," she said, "and I don't think
anyone will suspect you've been up to your tricks unless you brag
about them.  But it does seem to me that after you broke your knee
last year, jumping that same fence--"

"Well, may I be damned if I'll have me own daughter telling me
what I shall jump and not jump," he shouted, giving her cheek
another pinch.  "It's me own neck, so it is.  And besides, Missy,
what are you doing out here without your shawl?"

Seeing that he was employing familiar maneuvers to extricate
himself from unpleasant conversation, she slipped her arm through
his and said:  "I was waiting for you.  I didn't know you would be
so late.  I just wondered if you had bought Dilcey."

"Bought her I did, and the price has ruined me.  Bought her and
her little wench, Prissy.  John Wilkes was for almost giving them
away, but never will I have it said that Gerald O'Hara used
friendship in a trade.  I made him take three thousand for the two
of them."

"In the name of Heaven, Pa, three thousand!  And you didn't need
to buy Prissy!"

"Has the time come when me own daughters sit in judgment on me?"
shouted Gerald rhetorically.  "Prissy is a likely little wench and
so--"

"I know her.  She's a sly, stupid creature," Scarlett rejoined
calmly, unimpressed by his uproar.  "And the only reason you
bought her was because Dilcey asked you to buy her."

Gerald looked crestfallen and embarrassed, as always when caught
in a kind deed, and Scarlett laughed outright at his transparency.

"Well, what if I did?  Was there any use buying Dilcey if she was
going to mope about the child?  Well, never again will I let a
darky on this place marry off it.  It's too expensive.  Well, come
on, Puss, let's go in to supper."

The shadows were falling thicker now, the last greenish tinge had
left the sky and a slight chill was displacing the balminess of
spring.  But Scarlett loitered, wondering how to bring up the
subject of Ashley without permitting Gerald to suspect her motive.
This was difficult, for Scarlett had not a subtle bone in her
body; and Gerald was so much like her he never failed to penetrate
her weak subterfuges, even as she penetrated his.  And he was
seldom tactful in doing it.

"How are they all over at Twelve Oaks?"

"About as usual.  Cade Calvert was there and, after I settled
about Dilcey, we all set on the gallery and had several toddies.
Cade has just come from Atlanta, and it's all upset they are there
and talking war and--"

Scarlett sighed.  If Gerald once got on the subject of war and
secession, it would be hours before he relinquished it.  She broke
in with another line.

"Did they say anything about the barbecue tomorrow?"

"Now that I think of it they did.  Miss--what's-her-name--the
sweet little thing who was here last year, you know, Ashley's
cousin--oh, yes, Miss Melanie Hamilton, that's the name--she and
her brother Charles have already come from Atlanta and--"

"Oh, so she did come?"

"She did, and a sweet quiet thing she is, with never a word to say
for herself, like a woman should be.  Come now, daughter, don't
lag.  Your mother will be hunting for us."

Scarlett's heart sank at the news.  She had hoped against hope
that something would keep Melanie Hamilton in Atlanta where she
belonged, and the knowledge that even her father approved of her
sweet quiet nature, so different from her own, forced her into the
open.

"Was Ashley there, too?"

"He was."  Gerald let go of his daughter's arm and turned, peering
sharply into her face.  "And if that's why you came out here to
wait for me, why didn't you say so without beating around the
bush?"

Scarlett could think of nothing to say, and she felt her face
growing red with annoyance.

"Well, speak up."

Still she said nothing, wishing that it was permissible to shake
one's father and tell him to hush his mouth.

"He was there and he asked most kindly after you, as did his
sisters, and said they hoped nothing would keep you from the
barbecue tomorrow.  I'll warrant nothing will," he said shrewdly.
"And now, daughter, what's all this about you and Ashley?"

"There is nothing," she said shortly, tugging at his arm.  "Let's
go in, Pa."

"So now 'tis you wanting to go in," he observed.  "But here I'm
going to stand till I'm understanding you.  Now that I think of
it, 'tis strange you've been recently.  Has he been trifling with
you?  Has he asked to marry you?"

"No," she said shortly.

"Nor will he," said Gerald.

Fury flamed in her, but Gerald waved her quiet with a hand.

"Hold your tongue, Miss!  I had it from John Wilkes this afternoon
in the strictest confidence that Ashley's to marry Miss Melanie.
It's to be announced tomorrow."

Scarlett's hand fell from his arm.  So it was true!

A pain slashed at her heart as savagely as a wild animal's fangs.
Through it all, she felt her father's eyes on her, a little
pitying, a little annoyed at being faced with a problem for which
he knew no answer.  He loved Scarlett, but it made him uncomfortable
to have her forcing her childish problems on him for a solution.
Ellen knew all the answers.  Scarlett should have taken her troubles
to her.

"Is it a spectacle you've been making of yourself--of all of us?"
he bawled, his voice rising as always in moments of excitement.
"Have you been running after a man who's not in love with you,
when you could have any of the bucks in the County?"

Anger and hurt pride drove out some of the pain.

"I haven't been running after him.  It--it just surprised me."

"It's lying you are!" said Gerald, and then, peering at her
stricken face, he added in a burst of kindliness:  "I'm sorry,
daughter.  But after all, you are nothing but a child and there's
lots of other beaux."

"Mother was only fifteen when she married you, and I'm sixteen,"
said Scarlett, her voice muffled.

"Your mother was different," said Gerald.  "She was never flighty
like you.  Now come, daughter, cheer up, and I'll take you to
Charleston next week to visit your Aunt Eulalie and, what with all
the hullabaloo they are having over there about Fort Sumter,
you'll be forgetting about Ashley in a week."

"He thinks I'm a child," thought Scarlett, grief and anger choking
utterance, "and he's only got to dangle a new toy and I'll forget
my bumps."

"Now, don't be jerking your chin at me," warned Gerald.  "If you
had any sense you'd have married Stuart or Brent Tarleton long
ago.  Think it over, daughter.  Marry one of the twins and then
the plantations will run together and Jim Tarleton and I will
build you a fine house, right where they join, in that big pine
grove and--"

"Will you stop treating me like a child!" cried Scarlett.  "I
don't want to go to Charleston or have a house or marry the twins.
I only want--"  She caught herself but not in time.

Gerald's voice was strangely quiet and he spoke slowly as if
drawing his words from a store of thought seldom used.

"It's only Ashley you're wanting, and you'll not be having him.
And if he wanted to marry you, 'twould be with misgivings that I'd
say Yes, for all the fine friendship that's between me and John
Wilkes."  And, seeing her startled look, he continued:  "I want my
girl to be happy and you wouldn't be happy with him."

"Oh, I would!  I would!"

"That you would not, daughter.  Only when like marries like can
there be any happiness."

Scarlett had a sudden treacherous desire to cry out, "But you've
been happy, and you and Mother aren't alike," but she repressed
it, fearing that he would box her ears for her impertinence.

"Our people and the Wilkes are different," he went on slowly,
fumbling for words.  "The Wilkes are different from any of our
neighbors--different from any family I ever knew.  They are queer
folk, and it's best that they marry their cousins and keep their
queerness to themselves."

"Why, Pa, Ashley is not--"

"Hold your whist, Puss!  I said nothing against the lad, for I
like him.  And when I say queer, it's not crazy I'm meaning.  He's
not queer like the Calverts who'd gamble everything they have on a
horse, or the Tarletons who turn out a drunkard or two in every
litter, or the Fontaines who are hot-headed little brutes and
after murdering a man for a fancied slight.  That kind of
queerness is easy to understand, for sure, and but for the grace
of God Gerald O'Hara would be having all those faults!  And I
don't mean that Ashley would run off with another woman, if you
were his wife, or beat you.  You'd be happier if he did, for at
least you'd be understanding that.  But he's queer in other ways,
and there's no understanding him at all.  I like him, but it's
neither heads nor tails I can make of most he says.  Now, Puss,
tell me true, do you understand his folderol about books and
poetry and music and oil paintings and such foolishness?"

"Oh, Pa," cried Scarlett impatiently, "if I married him, I'd
change all that!"

"Oh, you would, would you now?" said Gerald testily, shooting a
sharp look at her.  "Then it's little enough you are knowing of
any man living, let alone Ashley.  No wife has ever changed a
husband one whit, and don't you be forgetting that.  And as for
changing a Wilkes--God's nightgown, daughter!  The whole family is
that way, and they've always been that way.  And probably always
will.  I tell you they're born queer.  Look at the way they go
tearing up to New York and Boston to hear operas and see oil
paintings.  And ordering French and German books by the crate from
the Yankees!  And there they sit reading and dreaming the dear God
knows what, when they'd be better spending their time hunting and
playing poker as proper men should."

"There's nobody in the County sits a horse better than Ashley,"
said Scarlett, furious at the slur of effeminacy flung on Ashley,
"nobody except maybe his father.  And as for poker, didn't Ashley
take two hundred dollars away from you just last week in
Jonesboro?"

"The Calvert boys have been blabbing again," Gerald said
resignedly, "else you'd not be knowing the amount.  Ashley can
ride with the best and play poker with the best--that's me, Puss!
And I'm not denying that when he sets out to drink he can put even
the Tarletons under the table.  He can do all those things, but
his heart's not in it.  That's why I say he's queer."

Scarlett was silent and her heart sank.  She could think of no
defense for this last, for she knew Gerald was right.  Ashley's
heart was in none of the pleasant things he did so well.  He was
never more than politely interested in any of the things that
vitally interested every one else.

Rightly interpreting her silence, Gerald patted her arm and said
triumphantly:  "There now, Scarlett!  You admit 'tis true.  What
would you be doing with a husband like Ashley?  'Tis moonstruck
they all are, all the Wilkes."  And then, in a wheedling tone:
"When I was mentioning the Tarletons the while ago, I wasn't
pushing them.  They're fine lads, but if it's Cade Calvert you're
setting your cap after, why, 'tis the same with me.  The Calverts
are good folk, all of them, for all the old man marrying a Yankee.
And when I'm gone--Whist, darlin', listen to me!  I'll leave Tara
to you and Cade--"

"I wouldn't have Cade on a silver tray," cried Scarlett in fury.
"And I wish you'd quit pushing him at me!  I don't want Tara or
any old plantation.  Plantations don't amount to anything when--"

She was going to say "when you haven't the man you want," but
Gerald, incensed by the cavalier way in which she treated his
proffered gift, the thing which, next to Ellen, he loved best in
the whole world uttered a roar.

"Do you stand there, Scarlett O'Hara, and tell me that Tara--that
land--doesn't amount to anything?"

Scarlett nodded obstinately.  Her heart was too sore to care
whether or not she put her father in a temper.

"Land is the only thing in the world that amounts to anything," he
shouted, his thick, short arms making wide gestures of indignation,
"for 'tis the only thing in this world that lasts, and don't you be
forgetting it!  'Tis the only thing worth working for, worth
fighting for--worth dying for."

"Oh, Pa," she said disgustedly, "you talk like an Irishman!"

"Have I ever been ashamed of it?  No, 'tis proud I am.  And don't
be forgetting that you are half Irish, Miss!  And to anyone with a
drop of Irish blood in them the land they live on is like their
mother.  'Tis ashamed of you I am this minute.  I offer you the
most beautiful land in the world--saving County Meath in the Old
Country--and what do you do?  You sniff!"

Gerald had begun to work himself up into a pleasurable shouting
rage when something in Scarlett's woebegone face stopped him.

"But there, you're young.  'Twill come to you, this love of land.
There's no getting away from it, if you're Irish.  You're just a
child and bothered about your beaux.  When you're older, you'll be
seeing how 'tis. . . .  Now, do you be making up your mind about
Cade or the twins or one of Evan Munroe's young bucks, and see how
fine I turn you out!"

"Oh, Pa!"

By this time, Gerald was thoroughly tired of the conversation and
thoroughly annoyed that the problem should be upon his shoulders.
He felt aggrieved, moreover, that Scarlett should still look
desolate after being offered the best of the County boys and Tara,
too.  Gerald liked his gifts to be received with clapping of hands
and kisses.

"Now, none of your pouts, Miss.  It doesn't matter who you marry,
as long as he thinks like you and is a gentleman and a Southerner
and prideful.  For a woman, love comes after marriage."

"Oh, Pa, that's such an Old Country notion!"

"And a good notion it is!  All this American business of running
around marrying for love, like servants, like Yankees!  The best
marriages are when the parents choose for the girl.  For how can a
silly piece like yourself tell a good man from a scoundrel?  Now,
look at the Wilkes.  What's kept them prideful and strong all
these generations?  Why, marrying the likes of themselves,
marrying the cousins their family always expects them to marry."

"Oh," cried Scarlett, fresh pain striking her as Gerald's words
brought home the terrible inevitability of the truth.

Gerald looked at her bowed head and shuffled his feet uneasily.

"It's not crying you are?" he questioned, fumbling clumsily at her
chin, trying to turn her face upward, his own face furrowed with
pity.

"No," she cried vehemently, jerking away.

"It's lying you are, and I'm proud of it.  I'm glad there's pride
in you, Puss.  And I want to see pride in you tomorrow at the
barbecue.  I'll not be having the County gossiping and laughing at
you for mooning your heart out about a man who never gave you a
thought beyond friendship."

"He did give me a thought," thought Scarlett, sorrowfully in her
heart.  "Oh, a lot of thoughts!  I know he did.  I could tell.  If
I'd just had a little longer, I know I could have made him say--
Oh, if it only wasn't that the Wilkes always feel that they have
to marry their cousins!"

Gerald took her arm and passed it through his.

"We'll be going in to supper now, and all this is between us.
I'll not be worrying your mother with this--nor do you do it
either.  Blow your nose, daughter."

Scarlett blew her nose on her torn handkerchief, and they started
up the dark drive arm in arm, the horse following slowly.  Near
the house, Scarlett was at the point of speaking again when she
saw her mother in the dim shadows of the porch.  She had on her
bonnet, shawl and mittens, and behind her was Mammy, her face like
a thundercloud, holding in her hand the black leather bag in which
Ellen O'Hara always carried the bandages and medicines she used in
doctoring the slaves.  Mammy's lips were large and pendulous and,
when indignant, she could push out her lower one to twice its
normal length.  It was pushed out now, and Scarlett knew that
Mammy was seething over something of which she did not approve.

"Mr. O'Hara," called Ellen as she saw the two coming up the
driveway--Ellen belonged to a generation that was formal even
after seventeen years of wedlock and the bearing of six children--
"Mr. O'Hara, there is illness at the Slattery house.  Emmie's baby
has been born and is dying and must be baptized.  I am going there
with Mammy to see what I can do."

Her voice was raised questioningly, as though she hung on Gerald's
assent to her plan, a mere formality but one dear to the heart of
Gerald.

"In the name of God!" blustered Gerald.  "Why should those white
trash take you away just at your supper hour and just when I'm
wanting to tell you about the war talk that's going on in Atlanta!
Go, Mrs. O'Hara.  You'd not rest easy on your pillow the night if
there was trouble abroad and you not there to help."

"She doan never git no res' on her piller fer hoppin' up at night
time nursin' niggers an po' w'ite trash dat could ten' to
deyseff," grumbled Mammy in a monotone as she went down the stairs
toward the carriage which was waiting in the side drive.

"Take my place at the table, dear," said Ellen, patting Scarlett's
cheek softly with a mittened hand.

In spite of her choked-back tears, Scarlett thrilled to the never-
failing magic of her mother's touch, to the faint fragrance of
lemon verbena sachet that came from her rustling silk dress.  To
Scarlett, there was something breath-taking about Ellen O'Hara, a
miracle that lived in the house with her and awed her and charmed
and soothed her.

Gerald helped his wife into the carriage and gave orders to the
coachman to drive carefully.  Toby, who had handled Gerald's
horses for twenty years, pushed out his lips in mute indignation
at being told how to conduct his own business.  Driving off, with
Mammy beside him, each was a perfect picture of pouting African
disapproval.

"If I didn't do so much for those trashy Slatterys that they'd
have to pay money for elsewhere," fumed Gerald, "they'd be willing
to sell me their miserable few acres of swamp bottom, and the
County would be well rid of them."  Then, brightening, in
anticipation of one of his practical jokes:  "Come daughter, let's
go tell Pork that instead of buying Dilcey, I've sold him to John
Wilkes."

He tossed the reins of his horse to a small pickaninny standing
near and started up the steps.  He had already forgotten
Scarlett's heartbreak and his mind was only on plaguing his valet.
Scarlett slowly climbed the steps after him, her feet leaden.  She
thought that, after all, a mating between herself and Ashley could
be no queerer than that of her father and Ellen Robillard O'Hara.
As always, she wondered how her loud, insensitive father had
managed to marry a woman like her mother, for never were two
people further apart in birth, breeding and habits of mind.



CHAPTER III


Ellen O'Hara was thirty-two years old, and, according to the
standards of her day, she was a middle-aged woman, one who had
borne six children and buried three.  She was a tall woman,
standing a head higher than her fiery little husband, but she
moved with such quiet grace in her swaying hoops that the height
attracted no attention to itself.  Her neck, rising from the black
taffeta sheath of her basque, was creamy-skinned, rounded and
slender, and it seemed always tilted slightly backward by the
weight of her luxuriant hair in its net at the back of her head.
From her French mother, whose parents had fled Haiti in the
Revolution of 1791, had come her slanting dark eyes, shadowed by
inky lashes, and her black hair; and from her father, a soldier of
Napoleon, she had her long straight nose and her square-cut jaw
that was softened by the gentle curving of her cheeks.  But only
from life could Ellen's face have acquired its look of pride that
had no haughtiness, its graciousness, its melancholy and its utter
lack of humor.

She would have been a strikingly beautiful woman had there been
any glow in her eyes, any responsive warmth in her smile or any
spontaneity in her voice that fell with gentle melody on the ears
of her family and her servants.  She spoke in the soft slurring
voice of the coastal Georgian, liquid of vowels, kind to
consonants and with the barest trace of French accent.  It was a
voice never raised in command to a servant or reproof to a child
but a voice that was obeyed instantly at Tara, where her husband's
blustering and roaring were quietly disregarded.

As far back as Scarlett could remember, her mother had always been
the same, her voice soft and sweet whether in praising or in
reproving, her manner efficient and unruffled despite the daily
emergencies of Gerald's turbulent household, her spirit always
calm and her back unbowed, even in the deaths of her three baby
sons.  Scarlett had never seen her mother's back touch the back of
any chair on which she sat.  Nor had she ever seen her sit down
without a bit of needlework in her hands, except at mealtime,
while attending the sick or while working at the bookkeeping of
the plantation.  It was delicate embroidery if company were
present, but at other times her hands were occupied with Gerald's
ruffled shirts, the girls' dresses or garments for the slaves.
Scarlett could not imagine her mother's hands without her gold
thimble or her rustling figure unaccompanied by the small negro
girl whose sole function in life was to remove basting threads and
carry the rosewood sewing box from room to room, as Ellen moved
about the house superintending the cooking, the cleaning and the
wholesale clothes-making for the plantation.

She had never seen her mother stirred from her austere placidity,
nor her personal appointments anything but perfect, no matter what
the hour of day or night.  When Ellen was dressing for a ball or
for guests or even to go to Jonesboro for Court Day, it frequently
required two hours, two maids and Mammy to turn her out to her own
satisfaction; but her swift toilets in times of emergency were
amazing.

Scarlett, whose room lay across the hall from her mother's, knew
from babyhood the soft sound of scurrying bare black feet on the
hardwood floor in the hours of dawn, the urgent tappings on her
mother's door, and the muffled, frightened negro voices that
whispered of sickness and birth and death in the long row of
whitewashed cabins in the quarters.  As a child, she often had
crept to the door and, peeping through the tiniest crack, had seen
Ellen emerge from the dark room, where Gerald's snores were
rhythmic and untroubled, into the flickering light of an upheld
candle, her medicine case under her arm, her hair smoothed neatly
place, and no button on her basque unlooped.

It had always been so soothing to Scarlett to hear her mother
whisper, firmly but compassionately, as she tiptoed down the hall:
"Hush, not so loudly.  You will wake Mr. O'Hara.  They are not
sick enough to die."

Yes, it was good to creep back into bed and know that Ellen was
abroad in the night and everything was right.

In the mornings, after all-night sessions at births and deaths,
when old Dr. Fontaine and young Dr. Fontaine were both out on
calls and could not be found to help her, Ellen presided at the
breakfast table as usual, her dark eyes circled with weariness but
her voice and manner revealing none of the strain.  There was a
steely quality under her stately gentleness that awed the whole
household, Gerald as well as the girls, though he would have died
rather than admit it.

Sometimes when Scarlett tiptoed at night to kiss her tall mother's
cheek, she looked up at the mouth with its too short, too tender
upper lip, a mouth too easily hurt by the world, and wondered if
it had ever curved in silly girlish giggling or whispered secrets
through long nights to intimate girl friends.  But no, that wasn't
possible.  Mother had always been just as she was, a pillar of
strength, a fount of wisdom, the one person who knew the answers
to everything.

But Scarlett was wrong, for, years before, Ellen Robillard of
Savannah had giggled as inexplicably as any fifteen-year-old in
that charming coastal city and whispered the long nights through
with friends, exchanging confidences, telling all secrets but one.
That was the year when Gerald O'Hara, twenty-eight years older
than she, came into her life--the year, too, when youth and her
black-eyed cousin, Philippe Robillard, went out of it.  For when
Philippe, with his snapping eyes and his wild ways, left Savannah
forever, he took with him the glow that was in Ellen's heart and
left for the bandy-legged little Irishman who married her only a
gentle shell.

But that was enough for Gerald, overwhelmed at his unbelievable
luck in actually marrying her.  And if anything was gone from her,
he never missed it.  Shrewd man that he was, he knew that it was
no less than a miracle that he, an Irishman with nothing of family
and wealth to recommend him, should win the daughter of one of the
wealthiest and proudest families on the Coast.  For Gerald was a
self-made man.



Gerald had come to America from Ireland when he was twenty-one.
He had come hastily, as many a better and worse Irishman before
and since, with the clothes he had on his back, two shillings
above his passage money and a price on his head that he felt was
larger than his misdeed warranted.  There was no Orangeman this
side of hell worth a hundred pounds to the British government or
to the devil himself; but if the government felt so strongly about
the death of an English absentee landlord's rent agent, it was
time for Gerald O'Hara to be leaving and leaving suddenly.  True,
he had called the rent agent "a bastard of an Orangeman," but
that, according to Gerald's way of looking at it, did not give the
man any right to insult him by whistling the opening bars of "The
Boyne Water."

The Battle of the Boyne had been fought more than a hundred years
before, but, to the O'Haras and their neighbors, it might have
been yesterday when their hopes and their dreams, as well as their
lands and wealth, went off in the same cloud of dust that
enveloped a frightened and fleeing Stuart prince, leaving William
of Orange and his hated troops with their orange cockades to cut
down the Irish adherents of the Stuarts.

For this and other reasons, Gerald's family was not inclined to
view the fatal outcome of this quarrel as anything very serious,
except for the fact that it was charged with serious consequences.
For years, the O'Haras had been in bad odor with the English
constabulary on account of suspected activities against the
government, and Gerald was not the first O'Hara to take his foot
in his hand and quit Ireland between dawn and morning.  His two
oldest brothers, James and Andrew, he hardly remembered, save as
close-lipped youths who came and went at odd hours of the night on
mysterious errands or disappeared for weeks at a time, to their
mother's gnawing anxiety.  They had come to America years before,
after the discovery of a small arsenal of rifles buried under the
O'Hara pigsty.  Now they were successful merchants in Savannah,
"though the dear God alone knows where that may be," as their
mother always interpolated when mentioning the two oldest of her
male brood, and it was to them that young Gerald was sent.

He left home with his mother's hasty kiss on his cheek and her
fervent Catholic blessing in his ears, and his father's parting
admonition, "Remember who ye are and don't be taking nothing off
no man."  His five tall brothers gave him good-by with admiring
but slightly patronizing smiles, for Gerald was the baby and the
little one of a brawny family.

His five brothers and their father stood six feet and over and
broad in proportion, but little Gerald, at twenty-one, knew that
five feet four and a half inches was as much as the Lord in His
wisdom was going to allow him.  It was like Gerald that he never
wasted regrets on his lack of height and never found it an
obstacle to his acquisition of anything he wanted.  Rather, it was
Gerald's compact smallness that made him what he was, for he had
learned early that little people must be hardy to survive among
large ones.  And Gerald was hardy.

His tall brothers were a grim, quiet lot, in whom the family
tradition of past glories, lost forever, rankled in unspoken hate
and crackled out in bitter humor.  Had Gerald been brawny, he
would have gone the way of the other O'Haras and moved quietly and
darkly among the rebels against the government.  But Gerald was
"loud-mouthed and bullheaded," as his mother fondly phrased it,
hair trigger of temper, quick with his fists and possessed of a
chip on his shoulder so large as to be almost visible to the naked
eye.  He swaggered among the tall O'Haras like a strutting bantam
in a barnyard of giant Cochin roosters, and they loved him, baited
him affectionately to hear him roar and hammered on him with their
large fists no more than was necessary to keep a baby brother in
his proper place.

If the educational equipment which Gerald brought to America was
scant, he did not even know it.  Nor would he have cared if he had
been told.  His mother had taught him to read and to write a clear
hand.  He was adept at ciphering.  And there his book knowledge
stopped.  The only Latin he knew was the responses of the Mass and
the only history the manifold wrongs of Ireland.  He knew no
poetry save that of Moore and no music except the songs of Ireland
that had come down through the years.  While he entertained the
liveliest respect for those who had more book learning than he, he
never felt his own lack.  And what need had he of these things in
a new country where the most ignorant of bogtrotters had made
great fortunes? in this country which asked only that a man be
strong and unafraid of work?

Nor did James and Andrew, who took him into their store in
Savannah, regret his lack of education.  His clear hand, his
accurate figures and his shrewd ability in bargaining won their
respect, where a knowledge of literature and a fine appreciation
of music, had young Gerald possessed them, would have moved them
to snorts of contempt.  America, in the early years of the
century, had been kind to the Irish.  James and Andrew, who had
begun by hauling goods in covered wagons from Savannah to
Georgia's inland towns, had prospered into a store of their own,
and Gerald prospered with them.

He liked the South, and he soon became, in his own opinion, a
Southerner.  There was much about the South--and Southerners--that
he would never comprehend: but, with the wholeheartedness that was
his nature, he adopted its ideas and customs, as he understood
them, for his own--poker and horse racing, red-hot politics and
the code duello, States' Rights and damnation to all Yankees,
slavery and King Cotton, contempt for white trash and exaggerated
courtesy to women.  He even learned to chew tobacco.  There was no
need for him to acquire a good head for whisky, he had been born
with one.

But Gerald remained Gerald.  His habits of living and his ideas
changed, but his manners he would not change, even had he been
able to change them.  He admired the drawling elegance of the
wealthy rice and cotton planters, who rode into Savannah from
their moss-hung kingdoms, mounted on thoroughbred horses and
followed by the carriages of their equally elegant ladies and the
wagons of their slaves.  But Gerald could never attain elegance.
Their lazy, blurred voices fell pleasantly on his ears, but his
own brisk brogue clung to his tongue.  He liked the casual grace
with which they conducted affairs of importance, risking a fortune,
a plantation or a slave on the turn of a card and writing off their
losses with careless good humor and no more ado than when they
scattered pennies to pickaninnies.  But Gerald had known poverty,
and he could never learn to lose money with good humor or good
grace.  They were a pleasant race, these coastal Georgians, with
their soft-voiced, quick rages and their charming inconsistencies,
and Gerald liked them.  But there was a brisk and restless vitality
about the young Irishman, fresh from a country where winds blew wet
and chill, where misty swamps held no fevers, that set him apart
from these indolent gentlefolk of semi-tropical weather and malarial
marshes.

From them he learned what he found useful, and the rest he
dismissed.  He found poker the most useful of all Southern
customs, poker and a steady head for whisky; and it was his
natural aptitude for cards and amber liquor that brought to Gerald
two of his three most prized possessions, his valet and his
plantation.  The other was his wife, and he could only attribute
her to the mysterious kindness of God.

The valet, Pork by name, shining black, dignified and trained in
all the arts of sartorial elegance, was the result of an all-night
poker game with a planter from St. Simons Island, whose courage in
a bluff equaled Gerald's but whose head for New Orleans rum did
not.  Though Pork's former owner later offered to buy him back at
twice his value, Gerald obstinately refused, for the possession of
his first slave, and that slave the "best damn valet on the
Coast," was the first step upward toward his heart's desire,
Gerald wanted to be a slave owner and a landed gentleman.

His mind was made up that he was not going to spend all of his
days, like James and Andrew, in bargaining, or all his nights, by
candlelight, over long columns of figures.  He felt keenly, as his
brothers did not, the social stigma attached to those "in trade."
Gerald wanted to be a planter.  With the deep hunger of an
Irishman who has been a tenant on the lands his people once had
owned and hunted, he wanted to see his own acres stretching green
before his eyes.  With a ruthless singleness of purpose, he
desired his own house, his own plantation, his own horse, his own
slaves.  And here in this new country, safe from the twin perils
of the land he had left--taxation that ate up crops and barns and
the ever-present threat of sudden confiscation--he intended to
have them.  But having that ambition and bringing it to realization
were two different matters, he discovered as time went by.  Coastal
Georgia was too firmly held by an entrenched aristocracy for him
ever to hope to win the place he intended to have.

Then the hand of Fate and a hand of poker combined to give him the
plantation which he afterwards called Tara, and at the same time
moved him out of the Coast into the upland country of north
Georgia.

It was in a saloon in Savannah, on a hot night in spring, when the
chance conversation of a stranger sitting near by made Gerald
prick up his ears.  The stranger, a native of Savannah, had just
returned after twelve years in the inland country.  He had been
one of the winners in the land lottery conducted by the State to
divide up the vast area in middle Georgia, ceded by the Indians
the year before Gerald came to America.  He had gone up there and
established a plantation; but, now the house had burned down, he
was tired of the "accursed place" and would be most happy to get
it off his hands.

Gerald, his mind never free of the thought of owning a plantation
of his own, arranged an introduction, and his interest grew as the
stranger told how the northern section of the state was filling up
with newcomers from the Carolinas and Virginia.  Gerald had lived
in Savannah long enough to acquire a viewpoint of the Coast--that
all of the rest of the state was backwoods, with an Indian lurking
in every thicket.  In transacting business for O'Hara Brothers, he
had visited Augusta, a hundred miles up the Savannah River, and he
had traveled inland far enough to visit the old towns westward
from that city.  He knew that section to be as well settled as the
Coast, but from the stranger's description, his plantation was
more than two hundred and fifty miles inland from Savannah to the
north and west, and not many miles south of the Chattahoochee
River.  Gerald knew that northward beyond that stream the land was
still held by the Cherokees, so it was with amazement that he
heard the stranger jeer at suggestions of trouble with the Indians
and narrate how thriving towns were growing up and plantations
prospering in the new country.

An hour later when the conversation began to lag, Gerald, with a
guile that belied the wide innocence of his bright blue eyes,
proposed a game.  As the night wore on and the drinks went round,
there came a time when all the others in the game laid down their
hands and Gerald and the stranger were battling alone.  The
stranger shoved in all his chips and followed with the deed to his
plantation.  Gerald shoved in all his chips and laid on top of
them his wallet.  If the money it contained happened to belong to
the firm of O'Hara Brothers, Gerald's conscience was not
sufficiently troubled to confess it before Mass the following
morning.  He knew what he wanted, and when Gerald wanted something
he gained it by taking the most direct route.  Moreover, such was
his faith in his destiny and four deuces that he never for a
moment wondered just how the money would be paid back should a
higher hand be laid down across the table.

"It's no bargain you're getting and I am glad not to have to pay
more taxes on the place," sighed the possessor of an "ace full,"
as he called for pen and ink.  "The big house burned a year ago
and the fields are growing up in brush and seedling pine.  But
it's yours."

"Never mix cards and whisky unless you were weaned on Irish
poteen," Gerald told Pork gravely the same evening, as Pork
assisted him to bed.  And the valet, who had begun to attempt a
brogue out of admiration for his new master, made requisite answer
in a combination of Geechee and County Meath that would have
puzzled anyone except those two alone.

The muddy Flint River, running silently between walls of pine and
water oak covered with tangled vines, wrapped about Gerald's new
land like a curving arm and embraced it on two sides.  To Gerald,
standing on the small knoll where the house had been, this tall
barrier of green was as visible and pleasing an evidence of
ownership as though it were a fence that he himself had built to
mark his own.  He stood on the blackened foundation stones of the
burned building, looked down the long avenue of trees leading
toward the road and swore lustily, with a joy too deep for
thankful prayer.  These twin lines of somber trees were his, his
the abandoned lawn, waist high in weeds under white-starred young
magnolia trees.  The uncultivated fields, studded with tiny pines
and underbrush, that stretched their rolling red-clay surface away
into the distance on four sides belonged to Gerald O'Hara--were
all his because he had an unbefuddled Irish head and the courage
to stake everything on a hand of cards.

Gerald closed his eyes and, in the stillness of the unworked
acres, he felt that he had come home.  Here under his feet would
rise a house of whitewashed brick.  Across the road would be new
rail fences, inclosing fat cattle and blooded horses, and the red
earth that rolled down the hillside to the rich river bottom land
would gleam white as eiderdown in the sun--cotton, acres and acres
of cotton!  The fortunes of the O'Haras would rise again.

With his own small stake, what he could borrow from his
unenthusiastic brothers and a neat sum from mortgaging the land,
Gerald bought his first field hands and came to Tara to live in
bachelor solitude in the four-room overseer's house, till such a
time as the white walls of Tara should rise.

He cleared the fields and planted cotton and borrowed more money
from James and Andrew to buy more slaves.  The O'Haras were a
clannish tribe, clinging to one another in prosperity as well as
in adversity, not for any overweening family affection but because
they had learned through grim years that to survive a family must
present an unbroken front to the world.  They lent Gerald the
money and, in the years that followed, the money came back to them
with interest.  Gradually the plantation widened out, as Gerald
bought more acres lying near him, and in time the white house
became a reality instead of a dream.

It was built by slave labor, a clumsy sprawling building that
crowned the rise of ground overlooking the green incline of
pasture land running down to the river; and it pleased Gerald
greatly, for, even when new, it wore a look of mellowed years.
The old oaks, which had seen Indians pass under their limbs,
hugged the house closely with their great trunks and towered their
branches over the roof in dense shade.  The lawn, reclaimed from
weeds, grew thick with clover and Bermuda grass, and Gerald saw to
it that it was well kept.  From the avenue of cedars to the row of
white cabins in the slave quarters, there was an air of solidness,
of stability and permanence about Tara, and whenever Gerald
galloped around the bend in the road and saw his own roof rising
through green branches, his heart swelled with pride as though
each sight of it were the first sight.

He had done it all, little, hard-headed, blustering Gerald.

Gerald was on excellent terms with all his neighbors in the
County, except the MacIntoshes whose land adjoined his on the left
and the Slatterys whose meager three acres stretched on his right
along the swamp bottoms between the river and John Wilkes'
plantation.

The MacIntoshes were Scotch-Irish and Orangemen and, had they
possessed all the saintly qualities of the Catholic calendar, this
ancestry would have damned them forever in Gerald's eyes.  True,
they had lived in Georgia for seventy years and, before that, had
spent a generation in the Carolinas; but the first of the family
who set foot on American shores had come from Ulster, and that was
enough for Gerald.

They were a close-mouthed and stiff-necked family, who kept
strictly to themselves and intermarried with their Carolina
relatives, and Gerald was not alone in disliking them, for the
County people were neighborly and sociable and none too tolerant
of anyone lacking in those same qualities.  Rumors of Abolitionist
sympathies did not enhance the popularity of the MacIntoshes.  Old
Angus had never manumitted a single slave and had committed the
unpardonable social breach of selling some of his negroes to
passing slave traders en route to the cane fields of Louisiana,
but the rumors persisted.

"He's an Abolitionist, no doubt," observed Gerald to John Wilkes.
"But, in an Orangeman, when a principle comes up against Scotch
tightness, the principle fares ill."

The Slatterys were another affair.  Being poor white, they were
not even accorded the grudging respect that Angus MacIntosh's dour
independence wrung from neighboring families.  Old Slattery, who
clung persistently to his few acres, in spite of repeated offers
from Gerald and John Wilkes, was shiftless and whining.  His wife
was a snarly-haired woman, sickly and washed-out of appearance,
the mother of a brood of sullen and rabbity-looking children--
a brood which was increased regularly every year.  Tom Slattery
owned no slaves, and he and his two oldest boys spasmodically
worked their few acres of cotton, while the wife and younger
children tended what was supposed to be a vegetable garden.  But,
somehow, the cotton always failed, and the garden, due to Mrs.
Slattery's constant childbearing, seldom furnished enough to feed
her flock.

The sight of Tom Slattery dawdling on his neighbors' porches,
begging cotton seed for planting or a side of bacon to "tide him
over," was a familiar one.  Slattery hated his neighbors with what
little energy he possessed, sensing their contempt beneath their
courtesy, and especially did he hate "rich folks' uppity niggers."
The house negroes of the County considered themselves superior to
white trash, and their unconcealed scorn stung him, while their
more secure position in life stirred his envy.  By contrast with
his own miserable existence, they were well-fed, well-clothed and
looked after in sickness and old age.  They were proud of the good
names of their owners and, for the most part, proud to belong to
people who were quality, while he was despised by all.

Tom Slattery could have sold his farm for three times its value to
any of the planters in the County.  They would have considered it
money well spent to rid the community of an eyesore, but he was
well satisfied to remain and to subsist miserably on the proceeds
of a bale of cotton a year and the charity of his neighbors.

With all the rest of the County, Gerald was on terms of amity and
some intimacy.  The Wilkeses, the Calverts, the Tarletons, the
Fontaines, all smiled when the small figure on the big white horse
galloped up their driveways, smiled and signaled for tall glasses
in which a pony of Bourbon had been poured over a teaspoon of
sugar and a sprig of crushed mint.  Gerald was likable, and the
neighbors learned in time what the children, negroes and dogs
discovered at first sight, that a kind heart, a ready and
sympathetic ear and an open pocketbook lurked just behind his
bawling voice and his truculent manner.

His arrival was always amid a bedlam of hounds barking and small
black children shouting as they raced to meet him, quarreling for
the privilege of holding his horse and squirming and grinning
under his good-natured insults.  The white children clamored to
sit on his knee and be trotted, while he denounced to their elders
the infamy of Yankee politicians; the daughters of his friends
took him into their confidence about their love affairs, and the
youths of the neighborhood, fearful of confessing debts of honor
upon the carpets of their fathers, found him a friend in need.

"So, you've been owning this for a month, you young rascal!" he
would shout.  "And, in God's name, why haven't you been asking me
for the money before this?"

His rough manner of speech was too well known to give offense, and
it only made the young men grin sheepishly and reply:  "Well, sir,
I hated to trouble you, and my father--"

"Your father's a good man, and no denying it, but strict, and so
take this and let's be hearing no more of it."

The planters' ladies were the last to capitulate.  But, when Mrs.
Wilkes, "a great lady and with a rare gift for silence," as Gerald
characterized her, told her husband one evening, after Gerald's
horse had pounded down the driveway.  "He has a rough tongue, but
he is a gentleman," Gerald had definitely arrived.

He did not know that he had taken nearly ten years to arrive, for
it never occurred to him that his neighbors had eyed him askance
at first.  In his own mind, there had never been any doubt that he
belonged, from the moment he first set foot on Tara.

When Gerald was forty-three, so thickset of body and florid of
face that he looked like a hunting squire out of a sporting print,
it came to him that Tara, dear though it was, and the County folk,
with their open hearts and open houses, were not enough.  He
wanted a wife.

Tara cried out for a mistress.  The fat cook, a yard negro
elevated by necessity to the kitchen, never had the meals on time,
and the chambermaid, formerly a field hand, let dust accumulate on
the furniture and never seemed to have clean linen on hand, so
that the arrival of guests was always the occasion of much
stirring and to-do.  Pork, the only trained house negro on the
place, had general supervision over the other servants, but even
he had grown slack and careless after several years of exposure to
Gerald's happy-go-lucky mode of living.  As valet, he kept
Gerald's bedroom in order, and, as butler, he served the meals
with dignity and style, but otherwise he pretty well let matters
follow their own course.

With unerring African instinct, the negroes had all discovered
that Gerald had a loud bark and no bite at all, and they took
shameless advantage of him.  The air was always thick with threats
of selling slaves south and of direful whippings, but there never
had been a slave sold from Tara and only one whipping, and that
administered for not grooming down Gerald's pet horse after a long
day's hunting.

Gerald's sharp blue eyes noticed how efficiently his neighbors'
houses were run and with what ease the smooth-haired wives in
rustling skirts managed their servants.  He had no knowledge of
the dawn-till-midnight activities of these women, chained to
supervision of cooking, nursing, sewing and laundering.  He only
saw the outward results, and those results impressed him.

The urgent need of a wife became clear to him one morning when he
was dressing to ride to town for Court Day.  Pork brought forth
his favorite ruffled shirt, so inexpertly mended by the
chambermaid as to be unwearable by anyone except his valet.

"Mist' Gerald," said Pork, gratefully rolling up the shirt as
Gerald fumed, "whut you needs is a wife, and a wife whut has got
plen'y of house niggers."

Gerald upbraided Pork for his impertinence, but he knew that he
was right.  He wanted a wife and he wanted children and, if he did
not acquire them soon, it would be too late.  But he was not going
to marry just anyone, as Mr. Calvert had done, taking to wife the
Yankee governess of his motherless children.  His wife must be a
lady and a lady of blood, with as many airs and graces as Mrs.
Wilkes and the ability to manage Tara as well as Mrs. Wilkes
ordered her own domain.

But there were two difficulties in the way of marriage into the
County families.  The first was the scarcity of girls of
marriageable age.  The second, and more serious one, was that
Gerald was a "new man," despite his nearly ten years' residence,
and a foreigner.  No one knew anything about his family.  While
the society of up-country Georgia was not so impregnable as that
of the Coast aristocrats, no family wanted a daughter to wed a man
about whose grandfather nothing was known.

Gerald knew that despite the genuine liking of the County men with
whom he hunted, drank and talked politics there was hardly one
whose daughter he could marry.  And he did not intend to have it
gossiped about over supper tables that this, that or the other
father had regretfully refused to let Gerald O'Hara pay court to
his daughter.  This knowledge did not make Gerald feel inferior to
his neighbors.  Nothing could ever make Gerald feel that he was
inferior in any way to anyone.  It was merely a quaint custom of
the County that daughters only married into families who had lived
in the South much longer than twenty-two years, had owned land and
slaves and been addicted only to the fashionable vices during that
time.

"Pack up.  We're going to Savannah," he told Pork.  "And if I hear
you say 'Whist!' or 'Faith!' but once, it's selling you I'll be
doing, for they are words I seldom say meself."

James and Andrew might have some advice to offer on this subject
of marriage, and there might be daughters among their old friends
who would both meet his requirements and find him acceptable as a
husband.  James and Andrew listened to his story patiently but
they gave him little encouragement.  They had no Savannah
relatives to whom they might look for assistance, for they had
been married when they came to America.  And the daughters of
their old friends had long since married and were raising small
children of their own.

"You're not a rich man and you haven't a great family," said
James.

"I've made me money and I can make a great family.  And I won't be
marrying just anyone."

"You fly high," observed Andrew, dryly.

But they did their best for Gerald.  James and Andrew were old men
and they stood well in Savannah.  They had many friends, and for a
month they carried Gerald from home to home, to suppers, dances
and picnics.

"There's only one who takes me eye," Gerald said finally.  "And
she not even born when I landed here."

"And who is it takes your eye?"

"Miss Ellen Robillard," said Gerald, trying to speak casually, for
the slightly tilting dark eyes of Ellen Robillard had taken more
than his eye.  Despite a mystifying listlessness of manner, so
strange in a girl of fifteen, she charmed him.  Moreover, there
was a haunting look of despair about her that went to his heart
and made him more gentle with her than he had ever been with any
person in all the world.

"And you old enough to be her father!"

"And me in me prime!" cried Gerald stung.

James spoke gently.

"Jerry, there's no girl in Savannah you'd have less chance of
marrying.  Her father is a Robillard, and those French are proud
as Lucifer.  And her mother--God rest her soul--was a very great
lady."

"I care not," said Gerald heatedly.  "Besides, her mother is dead,
and old man Robillard likes me."

"As a man, yes, but as a son-in-law, no."

"The girl wouldn't have you anyway," interposed Andrew.  "She's
been in love with that wild buck of a cousin of hers, Philippe
Robillard, for a year now, despite her family being at her morning
and night to give him up."

"He's been gone to Louisiana this month now," said Gerald.

"And how do you know?"

"I know," answered Gerald, who did not care to disclose that Pork
had supplied this valuable bit of information, or that Philippe
had departed for the West at the express desire of his family.
"And I do not think she's been so much in love with him that she
won't forget him.  Fifteen is too young to know much about love."

"They'd rather have that breakneck cousin for her than you."

So, James and Andrew were as startled as anyone when the news came
out that the daughter of Pierre Robillard was to marry the little
Irishman from up the country.  Savannah buzzed behind its doors
and speculated about Philippe Robillard, who had gone West, but
the gossiping brought no answer.  Why the loveliest of the
Robillard daughters should marry a loud-voiced, red-faced little
man who came hardly up to her ears remained a mystery to all.

Gerald himself never quite knew how it all came about.  He only
knew that a miracle had happened.  And, for once in his life, he
was utterly humble when Ellen, very white but very calm, put a
light hand on his arm and said:  "I will marry you, Mr. O'Hara."

The thunderstruck Robillards knew the answer in part, but only
Ellen and her mammy ever knew the whole story of the night when
the girl sobbed till the dawn like a broken-hearted child and rose
up in the morning a woman with her mind made up.

With foreboding, Mammy had brought her young mistress a small
package, addressed in a strange hand from New Orleans, a package
containing a miniature of Ellen, which she flung to the floor with
a cry, four letters in her own handwriting to Philippe Robillard,
and a brief letter from a New Orleans priest, announcing the death
of her cousin in a barroom brawl.

"They drove him away, Father and Pauline and Eulalie.  They drove
him away.  I hate them.  I hate them all.  I never want to see
them again.  I want to get away.  I will go away where I'll never
see them again, or this town, or anyone who reminds me of--of--
him."

And when the night was nearly spent, Mammy, who had cried herself
out over her mistress' dark head, protested, "But, honey, you kain
do dat!"

"I will do it.  He is a kind man.  I will do it or go into the
convent at Charleston."

It was the threat of the convent that finally won the assent of
bewildered and heartstricken Pierre Robillard.  He was staunchly
Presbyterian, even though his family were Catholic, and the
thought of his daughter becoming a nun was even worse than that of
her marrying Gerald O'Hara.  After all, the man had nothing
against him but a lack of family.

So, Ellen, no longer Robillard, turned her back on Savannah, never
to see it again, and with a middle-aged husband, Mammy, and twenty
"house niggers" journeyed toward Tara.

The next year, their first child was born and they named her Katie
Scarlett, after Gerald's mother.  Gerald was disappointed, for he
had wanted a son, but he nevertheless was pleased enough over his
small black-haired daughter to serve rum to every slave at Tara
and to get roaringly, happily drunk himself.

If Ellen had ever regretted her sudden decision to marry him, no
one ever knew it, certainly not Gerald, who almost burst with
pride whenever he looked at her.  She had put Savannah and its
memories behind her when she left that gently mannered city by the
sea, and, from the moment of her arrival in the County, north
Georgia was her home.

When she departed from her father's house forever, she had left a
home whose lines were as beautiful and flowing as a woman's body,
as a ship in full sail; a pale pink stucco house built in the
French colonial style, set high from the ground in a dainty
manner, approached by swirling stairs, banistered with wrought
iron as delicate as lace; a dim, rich house, gracious but aloof.

She had left not only that graceful dwelling but also the entire
civilization that was behind the building of it, and she found
herself in a world that was as strange and different as if she had
crossed a continent.

Here in north Georgia was a rugged section held by a hardy people.
High up on the plateau at the foot of the Blue Ridge Mountains,
she saw rolling red hills wherever she looked, with huge
outcroppings of the underlying granite and gaunt pines towering
somberly everywhere.  It all seemed wild and untamed to her coast-
bred eyes accustomed to the quiet jungle beauty of the sea islands
draped in their gray moss and tangled green, the white stretches
of beach hot beneath a semitropic sun, the long flat vistas of
sandy land studded with palmetto and palm.

This was a section that knew the chill of winter, as well as the
heat of summer, and there was a vigor and energy in the people
that was strange to her.  They were a kindly people, courteous,
generous, filled with abounding good nature, but sturdy, virile,
easy to anger.  The people of the Coast which she had left might
pride themselves on taking all their affairs, even their duels and
their feuds, with a careless air but these north Georgia people
had a streak of violence in them.  On the coast, life had
mellowed--here it was young and lusty and new.

All the people Ellen had known in Savannah might have been cast
from the same mold, so similar were their view points and
traditions, but here was a variety of people.  North Georgia's
settlers were coming in from many different places, from other
parts of Georgia, from the Carolinas and Virginia, from Europe and
the North.  Some of them, like Gerald, were new people seeking
their fortunes.  Some, like Ellen, were members of old families
who had found life intolerable in their former homes and sought
haven in a distant land.  Many had moved for no reason at all,
except that the restless blood of pioneering fathers still
quickened in their veins.

These people, drawn from many different places and with many
different backgrounds, gave the whole life of the County an
informality that was new to Ellen, an informality to which she
never quite accustomed herself.  She instinctively knew how Coast
people would act in any circumstance.  There was never any telling
what north Georgians would do.

And, quickening all of the affairs of the section, was the high
tide of prosperity then rolling over the South.  All of the world
was crying out for cotton, and the new land of the County, unworn
and fertile, produced it abundantly.  Cotton was the heartbeat of
the section, the planting and the picking were the diastole and
systole of the red earth.  Wealth came out of the curving furrows,
and arrogance came too--arrogance built on green bushes and the
acres of fleecy white.  If cotton could make them rich in one
generation, how much richer they would be in the next!

This certainty of the morrow gave zest and enthusiasm to life, and
the County people enjoyed life with a heartiness that Ellen could
never understand.  They had money enough and slaves enough to give
them time to play, and they liked to play.  They seemed never too
busy to drop work for a fish fry, a hunt or a horse race, and
scarcely a week went by without its barbecue or ball.

Ellen never would, or could, quite become one of them--she had
left too much of herself in Savannah--but she respected them and,
in time, learned to admire the frankness and forthrightness of
these people, who had few reticences and who valued a man for what
he was.

She became the best-loved neighbor in the County.  She was a
thrifty and kind mistress, a good mother and a devoted wife.  The
heartbreak and selflessness that she would have dedicated to the
Church were devoted instead to the service of her child, her
household and the man who had taken her out of Savannah and its
memories and had never asked any questions.

When Scarlett was a year old, and more healthy and vigorous than a
girl baby had any right to be, in Mammy's opinion, Ellen's second
child, named Susan Elinor, but always called Suellen, was born,
and in due time came Carreen, listed in the family Bible as
Caroline Irene.  Then followed three little boys, each of whom
died before he had learned to walk--three little boys who now lay
under the twisted cedars in the burying ground a hundred yards
from the house, beneath three stones, each bearing the name of
"Gerald O'Hara, Jr."

From the day when Ellen first came to Tara, the place had been
transformed.  If she was only fifteen years old, she was
nevertheless ready for the responsibilities of the mistress of a
plantation.  Before marriage, young girls must be, above all other
things, sweet, gentle, beautiful and ornamental, but, after
marriage, they were expected to manage households that numbered a
hundred people or more, white and black, and they were trained
with that in view.

Ellen had been given this preparation for marriage which any well-
brought-up young lady received, and she also had Mammy, who could
galvanize the most shiftless negro into energy.  She quickly
brought order, dignity and grace into Gerald's household, and she
gave Tara a beauty it had never had before.

The house had been built according to no architectural plan
whatever, with extra rooms added where and when it seemed
convenient, but, with Ellen's care and attention, it gained a
charm that made up for its lack of design.  The avenue of cedars
leading from the main road to the house--that avenue of cedars
without which no Georgia planter's home could be complete--had a
cool dark shadiness that gave a brighter tinge, by contrast, to
the green of the other trees.  The wistaria tumbling over the
verandas showed bright against the whitewashed brick, and it
joined with the pink crepe myrtle bushes by the door and the
white-blossomed magnolias in the yard to disguise some of the
awkward lines of the house.

In spring time and summer, the Bermuda grass and clover on the
lawn became emerald, so enticing an emerald that it presented an
irresistible temptation to the flocks of turkeys and white geese
that were supposed to roam only the regions in the rear of the
house.  The elders of the flocks continually led stealthy advances
into the front yard, lured on by the green of the grass and the
luscious promise of the cape jessamine buds and the zinnia beds.
Against their depredations, a small black sentinel was stationed
on the front porch.  Armed with a ragged towel, the little negro
boy sitting on the steps was part of the picture of Tara--and an
unhappy one, for he was forbidden to chunk the fowls and could
only flap the towel at them and shoo them.

Ellen set dozens of little black boys to this task, the first
position of responsibility a male slave had at Tara.  After they
had passed their tenth year, they were sent to old Daddy the
plantation cobbler to learn his trade, or to Amos the wheelwright
and carpenter, or Philip the cow man, or Cuffee the mule boy.  If
they showed no aptitude for any of these trades, they became field
hands and, in the opinion of the negroes, they had lost their
claim to any social standing at all.

Ellen's life was not easy, nor was it happy, but she did not
expect life to be easy, and, if it was not happy, that was woman's
lot.  It was a man's world, and she accepted it as such.  The man
owned the property, and the woman managed it.  The man took the
credit for the management, and the woman praised his cleverness.
The man roared like a bull when a splinter was in his finger, and
the woman muffled the moans of childbirth, lest she disturb him.
Men were rough of speech and often drunk.  Women ignored the
lapses of speech and put the drunkards to bed without bitter
words.  Men were rude and outspoken, women were always kind,
gracious and forgiving.

She had been reared in the tradition of great ladies, which had
taught her how to carry her burden and still retain her charm, and
she intended that her three daughters should be great ladies also.
With her younger daughters, she had success, for Suellen was so
anxious to be attractive she lent an attentive and obedient ear to
her mother's teachings, and Carreen was shy and easily led.  But
Scarlett, child of Gerald, found the road to ladyhood hard.

To Mammy's indignation, her preferred playmates were not her
demure sisters or the well-brought-up Wilkes girls but the negro
children on the plantation and the boys of the neighborhood, and
she could climb a tree or throw a rock as well as any of them.
Mammy was greatly perturbed that Ellen's daughter should display
such traits and frequently adjured her to "ack lak a lil lady."
But Ellen took a more tolerant and long-sighted view of the
matter.  She knew that from childhood playmates grew beaux in
later years, and the first duty of a girl was to get married.  She
told herself that the child was merely full of life and there was
still time in which to teach her the arts and graces of being
attractive to men.

To this end, Ellen and Mammy bent their efforts, and as Scarlett
grew older she became an apt pupil in this subject, even though
she learned little else.  Despite a succession of governesses and
two years at the near-by Fayetteville Female Academy, her
education was sketchy, but no girl in the County danced more
gracefully than she.  She knew how to smile so that her dimples
leaped, how to walk pigeon-toed so that her wide hoop skirts
swayed entrancingly, how to look up into a man's face and then
drop her eyes and bat the lids rapidly so that she seemed a-
tremble with gentle emotion.  Most of all she learned how to
conceal from men a sharp intelligence beneath a face as sweet and
bland as a baby's.

Ellen, by soft-voiced admonition, and Mammy, by constant carping,
labored to inculcate in her the qualities that would make her
truly desirable as a wife.

"You must be more gentle, dear, more sedate," Ellen told her
daughter.  "You must not interrupt gentlemen when they are
speaking, even if you do think you know more about matters than
they do.  Gentlemen do not like forward girls."

"Young misses whut frowns an pushes out dey chins an' says 'Ah
will' and 'Ah woan' mos' gener'ly doan ketch husbands," prophesied
Mammy gloomily.  "Young misses should cas' down dey eyes an' say,
'Well, suh, Ah mout' an' 'Jes' as you say, suh.'"

Between them, they taught her all that a gentlewoman should know,
but she learned only the outward signs of gentility.  The inner
grace from which these signs should spring, she never learned nor
did she see any reason for learning it.  Appearances were enough,
for the appearances of ladyhood won her popularity and that was
all she wanted.  Gerald bragged that she was the belle of five
counties, and with some truth, for she had received proposals from
nearly all the young men in the neighborhood and many from places
as far away as Atlanta and Savannah.

At sixteen, thanks to Mammy and Ellen, she looked sweet, charming
and giddy, but she was, in reality, self-willed, vain and
obstinate.  She had the easily stirred passions of her Irish
father and nothing except the thinnest veneer of her mother's
unselfish and forbearing nature.  Ellen never fully realized that
it was only a veneer, for Scarlett always showed her best face to
her mother, concealing her escapades, curbing her temper and
appearing as sweet-natured as she could in Ellen's presence, for
her mother could shame her to tears with a reproachful glance.

But Mammy was under no illusions about her and was constantly
alert for breaks in the veneer.  Mammy's eyes were sharper than
Ellen's, and Scarlett could never recall in all her life having
fooled Mammy for long.

It was not that these two loving mentors deplored Scarlett's high
spirits, vivacity and charm.  These were traits of which Southern
women were proud.  It was Gerald's headstrong and impetuous nature
in her that gave them concern, and they sometimes feared they
would not be able to conceal her damaging qualities until she had
made a good match.  But Scarlett intended to marry--and marry
Ashley--and she was willing to appear demure, pliable and
scatterbrained, if those were the qualities that attracted men.
Just why men should be this way, she did not know.  She only knew
that such methods worked.  It never interested her enough to try
to think out the reason for it, for she knew nothing of the inner
workings of any human being's mind, not even her own.  She knew
only that if she did or said thus-and-so, men would unerringly
respond with the complementary thus-and-so.  It was like a
mathematical formula and no more difficult, for mathematics was
the one subject that had come easy to Scarlett in her schooldays.

If she knew little about men's minds, she knew even less about the
minds of women, for they interested her less.  She had never had a
girl friend, and she never felt any lack on that account.  To her,
all women, including her two sisters, were natural enemies in
pursuit of the same prey--man.

All women with the one exception of her mother.

Ellen O'Hara was different, and Scarlett regarded her as something
holy and apart from all the rest of humankind.  When Scarlett was
a child, she had confused her mother with the Virgin Mary, and now
that she was older she saw no reason for changing her opinion.  To
her, Ellen represented the utter security that only Heaven or a
mother can give.  She knew that her mother was the embodiment of
justice, truth, loving tenderness and profound wisdom--a great
lady.

Scarlett wanted very much to be like her mother.  The only
difficulty was that by being just and truthful and tender and
unselfish, one missed most of the joys of life, and certainly many
beaux.  And life was too short to miss such pleasant things.  Some
day when she was married to Ashley and old, some day when she had
time for it, she intended to be like Ellen.  But, until then . . .

CHAPTER IV


That night at supper, Scarlett went through the motions of
presiding over the table in her mother's absence, but her mind was
in a ferment over the dreadful news she had heard about Ashley and
Melanie.  Desperately she longed for her mother's return from the
Slatterys', for, without her, she felt lost and alone.  What right
had the Slatterys and their everlasting sickness to take Ellen
away from home just at this time when she, Scarlett, needed her so
much?

Throughout the dismal meal, Gerald's booming voice battered
against her ears until she thought she could endure it no longer.
He had forgotten completely about his conversation with her that
afternoon and was carrying on a monologue about the latest news
from Fort Sumter, which he punctuated by hammering his fist on the
table and waving his arms in the air.  Gerald made a habit of
dominating the conversation at mealtimes, and usually Scarlett,
occupied with her own thoughts, scarcely heard him; but tonight
she could not shut out his voice, no matter how much she strained
to listen for the sound of carriage wheels that would herald
Ellen's return.

Of course, she did not intend to tell her mother what was so heavy
on her heart, for Ellen would be shocked and grieved to know that
a daughter of hers wanted a man who was engaged to another girl.
But, in the depths of the first tragedy she had ever known, she
wanted the very comfort of her mother's presence.  She always felt
secure when Ellen was by her, for there was nothing so bad that
Ellen could not better it, simply by being there.

She rose suddenly from her chair at the sound of creaking wheels
in the driveway and then sank down again as they went on around
the house to the back yard.  It could not be Ellen, for she would
alight at the front steps.  Then there was an excited babble of
negro voices in the darkness of the yard and high-pitched negro
laughter.  Looking out the window, Scarlett saw Pork, who had left
the room a moment before, holding high a flaring pine knot, while
indistinguishable figures descended from a wagon.  The laughter
and talking rose and fell in the dark night air, pleasant, homely,
carefree sounds, gutturally soft, musically shrill.  Then feet
shuffled up the back-porch stairs and into the passageway leading
to the main house, stopping in the hall just outside the dining
room.  There was a brief interval of whispering, and Pork entered,
his usual dignity gone, his eyes rolling and his teeth a-gleam.

"Mist' Gerald," he announced, breathing hard, the pride of a
bridegroom all over his shining face, "you' new 'oman done come."

"New woman?  I didn't buy any new woman," declared Gerald,
pretending to glare.

"Yassah, you did, Mist' Gerald!  Yassah!  An' she out hyah now
wanting ter speak wid you," answered Pork, giggling and twisting
his hands in excitement.

"Well, bring in the bride," said Gerald, and Pork, turning,
beckoned into the hall to his wife, newly arrived from the Wilkes
plantation to become part of the household of Tara.  She entered,
and behind her, almost hidden by her voluminous calico skirts,
came her twelve-year-old daughter, squirming against her mother's
legs.

Dilcey was tall and bore herself erectly.  She might have been any
age from thirty to sixty, so unlined was her immobile bronze face.
Indian blood was plain in her features, overbalancing the negroid
characteristics.  The red color of her skin, narrow high forehead,
prominent cheek bones and the hawk-bridged nose which flattened at
the end above thick negro lips, all showed the mixture of two
races.  She was self-possessed and walked with a dignity that
surpassed even Mammy's, for Mammy had acquired her dignity and
Dilcey's was in her blood.

When she spoke, her voice was not so slurred as most negroes' and
she chose her words more carefully.

"Good evenin', young Misses.  Mist' Gerald, I is sorry to 'sturb
you, but I wanted to come here and thank you agin fo' buyin' me
and my chile.  Lots of gentlemens might a' bought me but they
wouldn't a' bought my Prissy, too, jes' to keep me frum grievin'
and I thanks you.  I'm gwine do my bes' fo' you and show you I
ain't forgettin'."

"Hum--hurrump," said Gerald, clearing his throat in embarrassment
at being caught openly in an act of kindness.

Dilcey turned to Scarlett and something like a smile wrinkled the
corners of her eyes.  "Miss Scarlett, Poke done tole me how you
ast Mist Gerald to buy me.  And so I'm gwine give you my Prissy
fo' yo' own maid."

She reached behind her and jerked the little girl forward.  She
was a brown little creature, with skinny legs like a bird and a
myriad of pigtails carefully wrapped with twine sticking stiffly
out from her head.  She had sharp, knowing eyes that missed
nothing and a studiedly stupid look on her face.

"Thank you, Dilcey," Scarlett replied, "but I'm afraid Mammy will
have something to say about that.  She's been my maid ever since I
was born."

"Mammy getting ole," said Dilcey, with a calmness that would have
enraged Mammy.  "She a good mammy, but you a young lady now and
needs a good maid, and my Prissy been maidin' fo' Miss India fo' a
year now.  She kin sew and fix hair good as a grown pusson."

Prodded by her mother, Prissy bobbed a sudden curtsy and grinned
at Scarlett, who could not help grinning back.

"A sharp little wench," she thought, and said aloud:  "Thank you,
Dilcey, we'll see about it when Mother comes home."

"Thankee, Ma'm.  I gives you a good night," said Dilcey and,
turning, left the room with her child, Pork dancing attendance.
The supper things cleared away, Gerald resumed his oration, but
with little satisfaction to himself and none at all to his
audience.  His thunderous predictions of immediate war and his
rhetorical questions as to whether the South would stand for
further insults from the Yankees only produced faintly bored,
"Yes, Papas" and "No, Pas."  Carreen, sitting on a hassock under
the big lamp, was deep in the romance of a girl who had taken the
veil after her lover's death and, with silent tears of enjoyment
oozing from her eyes, was pleasurably picturing herself in a white
coif.  Suellen, embroidering on what she gigglingly called her
"hope chest," was wondering if she could possibly detach Stuart
Tarleton from her sister's side at the barbecue tomorrow and
fascinate him with the sweet womanly qualities which she possessed
and Scarlett did not.  And Scarlett was in a tumult about Ashley.

How could Pa talk on and on about Fort Sumter and the Yankees when
he knew her heart was breaking?  As usual in the very young, she
marveled that people could be so selfishly oblivious to her pain
and the world rock along just the same, in spite of her heartbreak.

Her mind was as if a cyclone had gone through it, and it seemed
strange that the dining room where they sat should be so placid,
so unchanged from what it had always been.  The heavy mahogany
table and sideboards, the massive silver, the bright rag rugs on
the shining floor were all in their accustomed places, just as if
nothing had happened.  It was a friendly and comfortable room and,
ordinarily, Scarlett loved the quiet hours which the family spent
there after supper; but tonight she hated the sight of it and, if
she had not feared her father's loudly bawled questions, she would
have slipped away, down the dark hall to Ellen's little office and
cried out her sorrow on the old sofa.

That was the room that Scarlett liked the best in all the house.
There, Ellen sat before her tall secretary each morning, keeping
the accounts of the plantation and listening to the reports of
Jonas Wilkerson, the overseer.  There also the family idled while
Ellen's quill scratched across her ledgers.  Gerald in the old
rocker, the girls on the sagging cushions of the sofa that was too
battered and worn for the front of the house.  Scarlett longed to
be there now, alone with Ellen, so she could put her head in her
mother's lap and cry in peace.  Wouldn't Mother ever come home?

Then, wheels ground sharply on the graveled driveway, and the soft
murmur of Ellen's voice dismissing the coachman floated into the
room.  The whole group looked up eagerly as she entered rapidly,
her hoops swaying, her face tired and sad.  There entered with her
the faint fragrance of lemon verbena sachet, which seemed always
to creep from the folds of her dresses, a fragrance that was
always linked in Scarlett's mind with her mother.  Mammy followed
at a few paces, the leather bag in her hand, her underlip pushed
out and her brow lowering.  Mammy muttered darkly to herself as
she waddled, taking care that her remarks were pitched too low to
be understood but loud enough to register her unqualified
disapproval.

"I am sorry I am so late," said Ellen, slipping her plaid shawl
from drooping shoulders and handing it to Scarlett, whose cheek
she patted in passing.

Gerald's face had brightened as if by magic at her entrance.

"Is the brat baptized?" he questioned.

"Yes, and dead, poor thing," said Ellen.  "I feared Emmie would
die too, but I think she will live."

The girls' faces turned to her, startled and questioning, and
Gerald wagged his head philosophically.

"Well, 'tis better so that the brat is dead, no doubt, poor
fatherle--"

"It is late.  We had better have prayers now," interrupted Ellen
so smoothly that, if Scarlett had not known her mother well, the
interruption would have passed unnoticed.

It would be interesting to know who was the father of Emmie
Slattery's baby, but Scarlett knew she would never learn the truth
of the matter if she waited to hear it from her mother.  Scarlett
suspected Jonas Wilkerson, for she had frequently seen him walking
down the road with Emmie at nightfall.  Jonas was a Yankee and a
bachelor, and the fact that he was an overseer forever barred him
from any contact with the County social life.  There was no family
of any standing into which he could marry, no people with whom he
could associate except the Slatterys and riffraff like them.  As
he was several cuts above the Slatterys in education, it was only
natural that he should not want to marry Emmie, no matter how
often he might walk with her in the twilight.

Scarlett sighed, for her curiosity was sharp.  Things were always
happening under her mother's eyes which she noticed no more than
if they had not happened at all.  Ellen ignored all things
contrary to her ideas of propriety and tried to teach Scarlett to
do the same, but with poor success.

Ellen had stepped to the mantel to take her rosary beads from the
small inlaid casket in which they always reposed when Mammy spoke
up with firmness.

"Miss Ellen, you gwine eat some supper befo' you does any
prayin'."

"Thank you.  Mammy, but I am not hungry."

"Ah gwine fix yo' supper mahseff an' you eats it," said Mammy, her
brow furrowed with indignation as she started down the hall for
the kitchen.  "Poke!" she called, "tell Cookie stir up de fiah.
Miss Ellen home."

As the boards shuddered under her weight, the soliloquy she had
been muttering in the front hall grew louder and louder, coming
clearly to the ears of the family in the dining room.

"Ah has said time an' again, it doan do no good doin' nuthin' fer
w'ite trash.  Dey is de shiflesses, mos' ungrateful passel of no-
counts livin'.  An' Miss Ellen got no bizness weahin' herseff out
waitin' on folks dat did dey be wuth shootin' dey'd have niggers
ter wait on dem.  An' Ah has said--"

Her voice trailed off as she went down the long open passageway,
covered only by a roof, that led into the kitchen.  Mammy had her
own method of letting her owners know exactly where she stood on
all matters.  She knew it was beneath the dignity of quality white
folks to pay the slightest attention to what a darky said when she
was just grumbling to herself.  She knew that to uphold this
dignity, they must ignore what she said, even if she stood in the
next room and almost shouted.  It protected her from reproof, and
it left no doubt in anyone's mind as to her exact views on any
subject.

Pork entered the room, bearing a plate, silver and a napkin.  He
was followed closely by Jack, a black little boy of ten, hastily
buttoning a white linen jacket with one hand and bearing in the
other a fly-swisher, made of thin strips of newspaper tied to a
reed longer than he was.  Ellen had a beautiful peacock-feather
fly-brusher, but it was used only on very special occasions and
then only after domestic struggle, due to the obstinate conviction
of Pork, Cookie and Mammy that peacock feathers were bad luck.

Ellen sat down in the chair which Gerald pulled out for her and
four voices attacked her.

"Mother, the lace is loose on my new ball dress and I want to wear
it tomorrow night at Twelve Oaks.  Won't you please fix it?"

"Mother, Scarlett's new dress is prettier than mine and I look
like a fright in pink.  Why can't she wear my pink and let me wear
her green?  She looks all right in pink."

"Mother, can I stay up for the ball tomorrow night?  I'm thirteen
now--"

"Mrs. O'Hara, would you believe it--  Hush, you girls, before I
take me crop to you!  Cade Calvert was in Atlanta this morning and
he says--will you be quiet and let me be hearing me own voice?--
and he says it's all upset they are there and talking nothing but
war, militia drilling, troops forming.  And he says the news from
Charleston is that they will be putting up with no more Yankee
insults."

Ellen's tired mouth smiled into the tumult as she addressed
herself first to her husband, as a wife should.

"If the nice people of Charleston feel that way, I'm sure we will
all feel the same way soon," she said, for she had a deeply rooted
belief that, excepting only Savannah, most of the gentle blood of
the whole continent could be found in that small seaport city, a
belief shared largely by Charlestonians.

"No, Carreen, next year, dear.  Then you can stay up for balls and
wear grown-up dresses, and what a good time my little pink cheeks
will have!  Don't pout, dear.  You can go to the barbecue,
remember that, and stay up through supper, but no balls until you
are fourteen.

"Give me your gown, Scarlett, I will whip the lace for you after
prayers.

"Suellen, I do not like your tone, dear.  Your pink gown is lovely
and suitable to your complexion, Scarlett's is to hers.  But you
may wear my garnet necklace tomorrow night."

Suellen, behind her mother's hack, wrinkled her nose triumphantly
at Scarlett, who had been planning to beg the necklace for
herself.  Scarlett put out her tongue at her.  Suellen was an
annoying sister with her whining and selfishness, and had it not
been for Ellen's restraining hand, Scarlett would frequently have
boxed her ears.

"Now, Mr. O'Hara, tell me more about what Mr. Calvert said about
Charleston," said Ellen.

Scarlett knew her mother cared nothing at all about war and
politics and thought them masculine matters about which no lady
could intelligently concern herself.  But it gave Gerald pleasure
to air his views, and Ellen was unfailingly thoughtful of her
husband's pleasure.

While Gerald launched forth on his news, Mammy set the plates
before her mistress, golden-topped biscuits, breast of fried
chicken and a yellow yam open and steaming, with melted butter
dripping from it.  Mammy pinched small Jack, and he hastened to
his business of slowly swishing the paper ribbons back and forth
behind Ellen.  Mammy stood beside the table, watching every
forkful that traveled from plate to mouth, as though she intended
to force the food down Ellen's throat should she see signs of
flagging.  Ellen ate diligently, but Scarlett could see that she
was too tired to know what she was eating.  Only Mammy's implacable
face forced her to it.

When the dish was empty and Gerald only midway in his remarks on
the thievishness of Yankees who wanted to free darkies and yet
offered no penny to pay for their freedom, Ellen rose.

"We'll be having prayers?" he questioned, reluctantly.

"Yes.  It is so late--why, it is actually ten o'clock," as the
clock with coughing and tinny thumps marked the hour.  "Carreen
should have been asleep long ago.  The lamp, please, Pork, and my
prayer book, Mammy."

Prompted by Mammy's hoarse whisper, Jack set his fly-brush in the
corner and removed the dishes, while Mammy fumbled in the
sideboard drawer for Ellen's worn prayer book.  Pork, tiptoeing,
reached the ring in the chain and drew the lamp slowly down until
the table top was brightly bathed in light and the ceiling receded
into shadows.  Ellen arranged her skirts and sank to the floor on
her knees, laying the open prayer book on the table before her and
clasping her hands upon it.  Gerald knelt beside her, and Scarlett
and Suellen took their accustomed places on the opposite side of
the table, folding their voluminous petticoats in pads under their
knees, so they would ache less from contact with the hard floor.
Carreen, who was small for her age, could not kneel comfortably at
the table and so knelt facing a chair, her elbows on the seat.
She liked this position, for she seldom failed to go to sleep
during prayers and, in this postures it escaped her mother's
notice.

The house servants shuffled and rustled in the hall to kneel by
the doorway, Mammy groaning aloud as she sank down, Pork straight
as a ramrod, Rosa and Teena, the maids, graceful in their
spreading bright calicoes, Cookie gaunt and yellow beneath her
snowy head rag, and Jack, stupid with sleep, as far away from
Mammy's pinching fingers as possible.  Their dark eyes gleamed
expectantly, for praying with their white folks was one of the
events of the day.  The old and colorful phrases of the litany
with its Oriental imagery meant little to them but it satisfied
something in their hearts, and they always swayed when they
chanted the responses:  "Lord, have mercy on us," "Christ, have
mercy on us."

Ellen closed her eyes and began praying, her voice rising and
falling, lulling and soothing.  Heads bowed in the circle of
yellow light as Ellen thanked God for the health and happiness of
her home, her family and her negroes.

When she had finished her prayers for those beneath the roof of
Tara, her father, mother, sisters, three dead babies and "all the
poor souls in Purgatory," she clasped her white beads between long
fingers and began the Rosary.  Like the rushing of a soft wind,
the responses from black throats and white throats rolled back:

"Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners, now, and at the
hour of our death."

Despite her heartache and the pain of unshed tears, a deep sense
of quiet and peace fell upon Scarlett as it always did at this
hour.  Some of the disappointment of the day and the dread of the
morrow departed from her, leaving a feeling of hope.  It was not
the lifting up of her heart to God that brought this balm, for
religion went no more than lip deep with her.  It was the sight of
her mother's serene face upturned to the throne of God and His
saints and angels, praying for blessings on those whom she loved.
When Ellen intervened with Heaven, Scarlett felt certain that
Heaven heard.

Ellen finished and Gerald, who could never find his beads at
prayer time, began furtively counting his decade on his fingers.
As his voice droned on, Scarlett's thoughts strayed, in spite of
herself.  She knew she should be examining her conscience.  Ellen
had taught her that at the end of each day it was her duty to
examine her conscience thoroughly, to admit her numerous faults
and pray to God for forgiveness and strength never to repeat them.
But Scarlett was examining her heart.

She dropped her head upon her folded hands so that her mother
could not see her face, and her thoughts went sadly back to
Ashley.  How could he be planning to marry Melanie when he really
loved her, Scarlett?  And when he knew how much she loved him?
How could he deliberately break her heart?

Then, suddenly, an idea, shining and new, flashed like a comet
through her brain.

"Why, Ashley hasn't an idea that I'm in love with him!"

She almost gasped aloud in the shock of its unexpectedness.  Her
mind stood still as if paralyzed for a long, breathless instant,
and then raced forward.

"How could he know?  I've always acted so prissy and ladylike and
touch-me-not around him he probably thinks I don't care a thing
about him except as a friend.  Yes, that's why he's never spoken!
He thinks his love is hopeless.  And that's why he's looked so--"

Her mind went swiftly back to those times when she had caught him
looking at her in that strange manner, when the gray eyes that
were such perfect curtains for his thoughts had been wide and
naked and had in them a look of torment and despair.

"He's been broken hearted because he thinks I'm in love with Brent
or Stuart or Cade.  And probably he thinks that if he can't have
me, he might as well please his family and marry Melanie.  But if
he knew I did love him--"

Her volatile spirits shot up from deepest depression to excited
happiness.  This was the answer to Ashley's reticence, to his
strange conduct.  He didn't know!  Her vanity leaped to the aid of
her desire to believe, making belief a certainty.  If he knew she
loved him, he would hasten to her side.  She had only to--

"Oh!" she thought rapturously, digging her fingers into her
lowered brow.  "What a fool I've been not to think of this till
now!  I must think of some way to let him know.  He wouldn't marry
her if he knew I loved him!  How could he?"

With a start, she realized that Gerald had finished and her
mother's eyes were on her.  Hastily she began her decade, telling
off the beads automatically but with a depth of emotion in her
voice that caused Mammy to open her eyes and shoot a searching
glance at her.  As she finished her prayers and Suellen, then
Carreen, began their decades, her mind was still speeding onward
with her entrancing new thought.

Even now, it wasn't too late!  Too often the County had been
scandalized by elopements when one or the other of the
participating parties was practically at the altar with a third.
And Ashley's engagement had not even been announced yet!  Yes,
there was plenty of time!

If no love lay between Ashley and Melanie but only a promise given
long ago, then why wasn't it possible for him to break that
promise and marry her?  Surely he would do it, if he knew that
she, Scarlett, loved him.  She must find some way to let him know.
She would find some way!  And then--

Scarlett came abruptly out of her dream of delight, for she had
neglected to make the responses and her mother was looking at her
reprovingly.  As she resumed the ritual, she opened her eyes
briefly and cast a quick glance around the room.  The kneeling
figures, the soft glow of the lamp, the dim shadows where the
negroes swayed, even the familiar objects that had been so hateful
to her sight an hour ago, in an instant took on the color of her
own emotions, and the room seemed once more a lovely place.  She
would never forget this moment or this scene!

"Virgin most faithful," her mother intoned.  The Litany of the
Virgin was beginning, and obediently Scarlett responded:  "Pray
for us," as Ellen praised in soft contralto the attributes of the
Mother of God.

As always since childhood, this was, for Scarlett, a moment for
adoration of Ellen, rather than the Virgin.  Sacrilegious though
it might be, Scarlett always saw, through her closed eyes, the
upturned face of Ellen and not the Blessed Virgin, as the ancient
phrases were repeated.  "Health of the Sick," "Seat of Wisdom,"
"Refuge of Sinners," "Mystical Rose"--they were beautiful because
they were the attributes of Ellen.  But tonight, because of the
exaltation of her own spirit, Scarlett found in the whole
ceremonial, the softly spoken words, the murmur of the responses,
a surpassing beauty beyond any that she had ever experienced
before.  And her heart went up to God in sincere thankfulness that
a pathway for her feet had been opened--out of her misery and
straight to the arms of Ashley.

When the last "Amen" sounded, they all rose, somewhat stiffly,
Mammy being hauled to her feet by the combined efforts of Teena
and Rosa.  Pork took a long spiller from the mantelpiece, lit it
from the lamp flame and went into the hall.  Opposite the winding
stair stood a walnut sideboard, too large for use in the dining
room, bearing on its wide top several lamps and a long row of
candles in candlesticks.  Pork lit one lamp and three candles and,
with the pompous dignity of a first chamberlain of the royal
bedchamber lighting a king and queen to their rooms, he led the
procession up the stairs, holding the light high above his head.
Ellen, on Gerald's arm, followed him, and the girls, each taking
her own candlestick, mounted after them.

Scarlett entered her room, set the candle on the tall chest of
drawers and fumbled in the dark closet for the dancing dress that
needed stitching.  Throwing it across her arm, she crossed the
hall quietly.  The door of her parents' bedroom was slightly ajar
and, before she could knock, Ellen's voice, low but stern, came to
her ears.

"Mr. O'Hara, you must dismiss Jonas Wilkerson."

Gerald exploded.  "And where will I be getting another overseer
who wouldn't be cheating me out of my eyeteeth?"

"He must be dismissed, immediately, tomorrow morning.  Big Sam is
a good foreman and he can take over the duties until you can hire
another overseer."

"Ah, ha!" came Gerald's voice.  "So, I understand!  Then the
worthy Jonas sired the--"

"He must be dismissed."

"So, he is the father of Emmie Slattery's baby," thought Scarlett.
"Oh, well, what else can you expect from a Yankee man and a white-
trash girl?"

Then, after a discreet pause which gave Gerald's splutterings time
to die away, she knocked on the door and handed the dress to her
mother.

By the time Scarlett had undressed and blown out the candle, her
plan for tomorrow had worked itself out in every detail.  It was a
simple plan, for, with Gerald's single-mindedness of purpose, her
eyes were centered on the goal and she thought only of the most
direct steps by which to reach it.

First, she would be "prideful," as Gerald had commanded.  From the
moment she arrived at Twelve Oaks, she would be her gayest, most
spirited self.  No one would suspect that she had ever been
downhearted because of Ashley and Melanie.  And she would flirt
with every man there.  That would be cruel to Ashley, but it would
make him yearn for her all the more.  She wouldn't overlook a man
of marriageable age, from ginger-whiskered old Frank Kennedy, who
was Suellen's beau, on down to shy, quiet, blushing Charles
Hamilton, Melanie's brother.  They would swarm around her like
bees around a hive, and certainly Ashley would be drawn from
Melanie to join the circle of her admirers.  Then somehow she
would maneuver to get a few minutes alone with him, away from the
crowd.  She hoped everything would work out that way, because it
would be more difficult otherwise.  But if Ashley didn't make the
first move, she would simply have to do it herself.

When they were finally alone, he would have fresh in his mind the
picture of the other men thronging about her, he would be newly
impressed with the fact that every one of them wanted her, and
that look of sadness and despair would be in his eyes.  Then she
would make him happy again by letting him discover that, popular
though she was, she preferred him above any other man in all the
world.  And when she admitted it, modestly and sweetly, she would
look a thousand things more.  Of course, she would do it all in a
ladylike way.  She wouldn't even dream of saying to him boldly
that she loved him--that would never do.  But the manner of
telling him was a detail that troubled her not at all.  She had
managed such situations before and she could do it again.

Lying in the bed with the moonlight streaming dimly over her,
she pictured the whole scene in her mind.  She saw the look of
surprise and happiness that would come over his face when he
realized that she really loved him, and she heard the words he
would say asking her to be his wife.

Naturally, she would have to say then that she simply couldn't
think of marrying a man when he was engaged to another girl, but
he would insist and finally she would let herself be persuaded.
Then they would decide to run off to Jonesboro that very afternoon
and--

Why, by this time tomorrow night, she might be Mrs. Ashley Wilkes!

She sat up in bed, hugging her knees, and for a long happy moment
she WAS Mrs. Ashley Wilkes--Ashley's bride!  Then a slight chill
entered her heart.  Suppose it didn't work out this way?  Suppose
Ashley didn't beg her to run away with him?  Resolutely she pushed
the thought from her mind.

"I won't think of that now," she said firmly.  "If I think of it
now, it will upset me.  There's no reason why things won't come
out the way I want them--if he loves me.  And I know he does!"

She raised her chin and her pale, black-fringed eyes sparkled in
the moonlight.  Ellen had never told her that desire and
attainment were two different matters; life had not taught her
that the race was not to the swift.  She lay in the silvery
shadows with courage rising and made the plans that a sixteen-
year-old makes when life has been so pleasant that defeat is an
impossibility and a pretty dress and a clear complexion are
weapons to vanquish fate.



CHAPTER V


It was ten o'clock in the morning.  The day was warm for April and
the golden sunlight streamed brilliantly into Scarlett's room
through the blue curtains of the wide windows.  The cream-colored
walls glowed with light and the depths of the mahogany furniture
gleamed deep red like wine, while the floor glistened as if it
were glass, except where the rag rugs covered it and they were
spots of gay color.

Already summer was in the air, the first hint of Georgia summer
when the high tide of spring gives way reluctantly before a
fiercer heat.  A balmy, soft warmth poured into the room, heavy
with velvety smells, redolent of many blossoms, of newly fledged
trees and of the moist, freshly turned red earth.  Through the
window Scarlett could see the bright riot of the twin lanes of
daffodils bordering the graveled driveway and the golden masses of
yellow jessamine spreading flowery sprangles modestly to the earth
like crinolines.  The mockingbirds and the jays, engaged in their
old feud for possession of the magnolia tree beneath her window,
were bickering, the jays strident, acrimonious, the mockers sweet
voiced and plaintive.

Such a glowing morning usually called Scarlett to the window, to
lean arms on the broad sill and drink in the scents and sounds of
Tara.  But, today she had no eye for sun or azure sky beyond a
hasty thought, "Thank God, it isn't raining."  On the bed lay the
apple-green, watered-silk ball dress with its festoons of ecru
lace, neatly packed in a large cardboard box.  It was ready to be
carried to Twelve Oaks to be donned before the dancing began, but
Scarlett shrugged at the sight of it.  If her plans were
successful, she would not wear that dress tonight.  Long before
the ball began, she and Ashley would be on their way to Jonesboro
to be married.  The troublesome question was--what dress should
she wear to the barbecue?

What dress would best set off her charms and make her most
irresistible to Ashley?  Since eight o'clock she had been trying
on and rejecting dresses, and now she stood dejected and irritable
in lace pantalets, linen corset cover and three billowing lace and
linen petticoats.  Discarded garments lay about her on the floor,
the bed, the chairs, in bright heaps of color and straying
ribbons.

The rose organdie with long pink sash was becoming, but she had
worn it last summer when Melanie visited Twelve Oaks and she'd be
sure to remember it.  And might be catty enough to mention it.
The black bombazine, with its puffed sleeves and princess lace
collar, set off her white skin superbly, but it did make her look
a trifle elderly.  Scarlett peered anxiously in the mirror at her
sixteen-year-old face as if expecting to see wrinkles and sagging
chin muscles.  It would never do to appear sedate and elderly
before Melanie's sweet youthfulness.  The lavender barred muslin
was beautiful with those wide insets of lace and net about the
hem, but it had never suited her type.  It would suit Carreen's
delicate profile and wishy-washy expression perfectly, but
Scarlett felt that it made her look like a schoolgirl.  It would
never do to appear schoolgirlish beside Melanie's poised self.
The green plaid taffeta, frothing with flounces and each flounce
edged in green velvet ribbon, was most becoming, in fact her
favorite dress, for it darkened her eyes to emerald.  But there
was unmistakably a grease spot on the front of the basque.  Of
course, her brooch could be pinned over the spot, but perhaps
Melanie had sharp eyes.  There remained varicolored cotton dresses
which Scarlett felt were not festive enough for the occasion, ball
dresses and the green sprigged muslin she had worn yesterday.  But
it was an afternoon dress.  It was not suitable for a barbecue,
for it had only tiny puffed sleeves and the neck was low enough
for a dancing dress.  But there was nothing else to do but wear
it.  After all she was not ashamed of her neck and arms and bosom,
even if it was not correct to show them in the morning.

As she stood before the mirror and twisted herself about to get a
side view, she thought that there was absolutely nothing about her
figure to cause her shame.  Her neck was short but rounded and her
arms plump and enticing.  Her breasts, pushed high by her stays,
were very nice breasts.  She had never had to sew tiny rows of
silk ruffles in the lining of her basques, as most sixteen-year-
old girls did, to give their figures the desired curves and
fullness.  She was glad she had inherited Ellen's slender white
hands and tiny feet, and she wished she had Ellen's height, too,
but her own height pleased her very well.  What a pity legs could
not be shown, she thought, pulling up her petticoats and
regretfully viewing them, plump and neat under pantalets.  She had
such nice legs.  Even the girls at the Fayetteville Academy had
admitted as much.  And as for her waist--there was no one in
Fayetteville, Jonesboro or in three counties, for that matter, who
had so small a waist.

The thought of her waist brought her back to practical matters.
The green muslin measured seventeen inches about the waist, and
Mammy had laced her for the eighteen-inch bombazine.  Mammy would
have to lace her tighter.  She pushed open the door, listened and
heard Mammy's heavy tread in the downstairs hall.  She shouted for
her impatiently, knowing she could raise her voice with impunity,
as Ellen was in the smokehouse, measuring out the day's food to
Cookie.

"Some folks thinks as how Ah kin fly," grumbled Mammy, shuffling
up the stairs.  She entered puffing, with the expression of one
who expects battle and welcomes it.  In her large black hands was
a tray upon which food smoked, two large yams covered with butter,
a pile of buckwheat cakes dripping syrup, and a large slice of ham
swimming in gravy.  Catching sight of Mammy's burden, Scarlett's
expression changed from one of minor irritation to obstinate
belligerency.  In the excitement of trying on dresses she had
forgotten Mammy's ironclad rule that, before going to any party,
the O'Hara girls must be crammed so full of food at home they
would be unable to eat any refreshments at the party.

"It's no use.  I won't eat it.  You can just take it back to the
kitchen."

Mammy set the tray on the table and squared herself, hands on
hips.

"Yas'm, you is!  Ah ain' figgerin' on havin' happen whut happen at
dat las' barbecue w'en Ah wuz too sick frum dem chittlins Ah et
ter fetch you no tray befo' you went.  You is gwine eat eve'y bite
of dis."

"I am not!  Now, come here and lace me tighter because we are late
already.  I heard the carriage come round to the front of the
house."

Mammy's tone became wheedling.

"Now, Miss Scarlett, you be good an' come eat jes'a lil.  Miss
Carreen an' Miss Suellen done eat all dey'n."

"They would," said Scarlett contemptuously.  "They haven't any
more spirit than a rabbit.  But I won't!  I'm through with trays.
I'm not forgetting the time I ate a whole tray and went to the
Calverts' and they had ice cream out of ice they'd brought all the
way from Savannah, and I couldn't eat but a spoonful.  I'm going
to have a good time today and eat as much as I please."

At this defiant heresy, Mammy's brow lowered with indignation.
What a young miss could do and what she could not do were as
different as black and white in Mammy's mind; there was no middle
ground of deportment between.  Suellen and Carreen were clay in
her powerful hands and harkened respectfully to her warning.  But
it had always been a struggle to teach Scarlett that most of her
natural impulses were unladylike.  Mammy's victories over Scarlett
were hard-won and represented guile unknown to the white mind.

"Ef you doan care 'bout how folks talks 'bout dis fainbly, Ah
does," she rumbled.  "Ah ain' gwine stand by an' have eve'ybody at
de pahty sayin' how you ain' fotched up right.  Ah has tole you
an' tole you dat you kin allus tell a lady by dat she eat lak a
bird.  An' Ah ain' aimin' ter have you go ter Mist' Wilkes' an'
eat lak a fe'el han' an' gobble lak a hawg."

"Mother is a lady and she eats," countered Scarlett.

"W'en you is mahied, you kin eat, too," retorted Mammy.  "W'en
Miss Ellen yo' age, she never et nuthin' w'en she went out, an'
needer yo' Aunt Pauline nor yo' Aunt Eulalie.  An' dey all done
mahied.  Young misses whut eats heavy mos' gener'ly doan never
ketch husbands."

"I don't believe it.  At that barbecue when you were sick and I
didn't eat beforehand, Ashley Wilkes told me he LIKED to see a
girl with a healthy appetite."

Mammy shook her head ominously.

"Whut gempmums says an' whut dey thinks is two diffunt things.
An' Ah ain' noticed Mist' Ashley axing fer ter mahy you."

Scarlett scowled, started to speak sharply and then caught
herself.  Mammy had her there and there was no argument.  Seeing
the obdurate look on Scarlett's face, Mammy picked up the tray
and, with the bland guile of her race, changed her tactics.  As
she started for the door, she sighed.

"Well'm, awright.  Ah wuz tellin' Cookie w'ile she wuz a-fixin'
dis tray.  'You kin sho tell a lady by whut she DOAN eat,' an' Ah
say ter Cookie.  'Ah ain' seed no w'ite lady who et less'n Miss
Melly Hamilton did las' time she wuz visitin' Mist' Ashley'--Ah
means, visitin' Miss India."

Scarlett shot a look of sharp suspicion at her, but Mammy's broad
face carried only a look of innocence and of regret that Scarlett
was not the lady Melanie Hamilton was.

"Put down that tray and come lace me tighter," said Scarlett
irritably.  "And I'll try to eat a little afterwards.  If I ate
now I couldn't lace tight enough."

Cloaking her triumph, Mammy set down the tray.

"Whut mah lamb gwine wear?"

"That," answered Scarlett, pointing at the fluffy mass of green
flowered muslin.  Instantly Mammy was in arms.

"No, you ain'.  It ain' fittin' fer mawnin'.  You kain show yo'
buzzum befo' three o'clock an' dat dress ain' got no neck an' no
sleeves.  An' you'll git freckled sho as you born, an' Ah ain'
figgerin' on you gittin' freckled affer all de buttermilk Ah been
puttin' on you all dis winter, bleachin' dem freckles you got at
Savannah settin' on de beach.  Ah sho gwine speak ter yo' Ma 'bout
you."

"If you say one word to her before I'm dressed I won't eat a
bite," said Scarlett coolly.  "Mother won't have time to send me
back to change once I'm dressed."

Mammy sighed resignedly, beholding herself outguessed.  Between
the two evils, it was better to have Scarlett wear an afternoon
dress at a morning barbecue than to have her gobble like a hog.

"Hole onter sumpin' an' suck in yo' breaf," she commanded.

Scarlett obeyed, bracing herself and catching firm hold of one of
the bedposts.  Mammy pulled and jerked vigorously and, as the tiny
circumference of whalebone-girdled waist grew smaller, a proud,
fond look came into her eyes.

"Ain' nobody got a wais' lak mah lamb," she said approvingly.
"Eve'y time Ah pulls Miss Suellen littler dan twenty inches, she
up an' faint."

"Pooh!" gasped Scarlctt, speaking with difficulty.  "I never
fainted in my life."

"Well, 'twouldn' do no hahm ef you wuz ter faint now an' den,"
advised Mammy.  "You is so brash sometimes, Miss Scarlett.  Ah
been aimin' ter tell you, it jes' doan look good de way you doan
faint 'bout snakes an' mouses an' sech.  Ah doan mean round home
but w'en you is out in comp'ny.  An' Ah has tole you an'--"

"Oh, hurry!  Don't talk so much.  I'll catch a husband.  See if I
don't, even if I don't scream and faint.  Goodness, but my stays
are tight!  Put on the dress."

Mammy carefully dropped the twelve yards of green sprigged muslin
over the mountainous petticoats and hooked up the back of the
tight, low-cut basque.

"You keep yo' shawl on yo' shoulders w'en you is in de sun, an'
doan you go takin' off yo' hat w'en you is wahm," she commanded.
"Elsewise you be comin' home lookin' brown lak Ole Miz Slattery.
Now, you come eat, honey, but doan eat too fas'.  No use havin' it
come right back up agin."

Scarlett obediently sat down before the tray, wondering if she
would be able to get any food into her stomach and still have room
to breathe.  Mammy plucked a large towel from the washstand and
carefully tied it around Scarlett's neck, spreading the white
folds over her lap.  Scarlett began on the ham, because she liked
ham, and forced it down.

"I wish to Heaven I was married," she said resentfully as she
attacked the yams with loathing.  "I'm tired of everlastingly
being unnatural and never doing anything I want to do.  I'm tired
of acting like I don't eat more than a bird, and walking when I
want to run and saying I feel faint after a waltz, when I could
dance for two days and never get tired.  I'm tired of saying, 'How
wonderful you are!' to fool men who haven't got one-half the sense
I've got, and I'm tired of pretending I don't know anything, so
men can tell me things and feel important while they're doing
it. . . .  I can't eat another bite."

"Try a hot cake," said Mammy inexorably.

"Why is it a girl has to be so silly to catch a husband?"

"Ah specs it's kase gempmums doan know whut dey wants.  Dey jes'
knows whut dey thinks dey wants.  An' givin' dem whut dey thinks
dey wants saves a pile of mizry an' bein' a ole maid.  An' dey
thinks dey wants mousy lil gals wid bird's tastes an' no sense at
all.  It doan make a gempmum feel lak mahyin' a lady ef he
suspicions she got mo' sense dan he has."

"Don't you suppose men get surprised after they're married to find
that their wives do have sense?"

"Well, it's too late den.  Dey's already mahied.  'Sides, gempmums
specs dey wives ter have sense."

"Some day I'm going to do and say everything I want to do and say,
and if people don't like it I don't care."

"No, you ain'," said Mammy grimly.  "Not while Ah got breaf.  You
eat dem cakes.  Sop dem in de gravy, honey."

"I don't think Yankee girls have to act like such fools.  When we
were at Saratoga last year, I noticed plenty of them acting like
they had right good sense and in front of men, too."

Mammy snorted.

"Yankee gals!  Yas'm, Ah guess dey speaks dey minds awright, but
Ah ain' noticed many of dem gittin' proposed ter at Saratoga."

"But Yankees must get married," argued Scarlett.  "They don't just
grow.  They must get married and have children.  There's too many
of them."

"Men mahys dem fer dey money," said Mammy firmly.

Scarlett sopped the wheat cake in the gravy and put it in her
mouth.  Perhaps there was something to what Mammy said.  There
must be something in it, for Ellen said the same things, in
different and more delicate words.  In fact, the mothers of all
her girl friends impressed on their daughters the necessity of
being helpless, clinging, doe-eyed creatures.  Really, it took a
lot of sense to cultivate and hold such a pose.  Perhaps she had
been too brash.  Occasionally she had argued with Ashley and
frankly aired her opinions.  Perhaps this and her healthy
enjoyment of walking and riding had turned him from her to the
frail Melanie.  Perhaps if she changed her tactics--  But she felt
that if Ashley succumbed to premeditated feminine tricks, she
could never respect him as she now did.  Any man who was fool
enough to fall for a simper, a faint and an "Oh, how wonderful you
are!" wasn't worth having.  But they all seemed to like it.

If she had used the wrong tactics with Ashley in the past--well,
that was the past and done with.  Today she would use different
ones, the right ones.  She wanted him and she had only a few hours
in which to get him.  If fainting, or pretending to faint, would
do the trick, then she would faint.  If simpering, coquetry or
empty-headedness would attract him, she would gladly play the
flirt and be more empty-headed than even Cathleen Calvert.  And if
bolder measures were necessary, she would take them.  Today was
the day!

There was no one to tell Scarlett that her own personality,
frighteningly vital though it was, was more attractive than any
masquerade she might adopt.  Had she been told, she would have
been pleased but unbelieving.  And the civilization of which she
was a part would have been unbelieving too, for at no time, before
or since, had so low a premium been placed on feminine
naturalness.



As the carriage bore her down the red road toward the Wilkes
plantation, Scarlett had a feeling of guilty pleasure that neither
her mother nor Mammy was with the party.  There would be no one at
the barbecue who, by delicately lifted brows or out-thrust
underlip, could interfere with her plan of action.  Of course,
Suellen would be certain to tell tales tomorrow, but if all went
as Scarlett hoped, the excitement of the family over her
engagement to Ashley or her elopement would more than overbalance
their displeasure.  Yes, she was very glad Ellen had been forced
to stay at home.

Gerald, primed with brandy, had given Jonas Wilkerson his
dismissal that morning, and Ellen had remained at Tara to go over
the accounts of the plantation before he took his departure.
Scarlett had kissed her mother good-by in the little office where
she sat before the tall secretary with its paper-stuffed
pigeonholes.  Jonas Wilkerson, hat in hand, stood beside her, his
sallow tight-skinned face hardly concealing the fury of hate that
possessed him at being so unceremoniously turned out of the best
overseer's job in the County.  And all because of a bit of minor
philandering.  He had told Gerald over and over that Emmie
Slattery's baby might have been fathered by any one of a dozen men
as easily as himself--an idea in which Gerald concurred--but that
had not altered his case so far as Ellen was concerned.  Jonas
hated all Southerners.  He hated their cool courtesy to him and
their contempt for his social status, so inadequately covered by
their courtesy.  He hated Ellen O'Hara above anyone else, for she
was the epitome of all that he hated in Southerners.

Mammy, as head woman of the plantation, had remained to help
Ellen, and it was Dilcey who rode on the driver's seat beside
Toby, the girls' dancing dresses in a long box across her lap.
Gerald rode beside the carriage on his big hunter, warm with
brandy and pleased with himself for having gotten through with the
unpleasant business of Wilkerson so speedily.  He had shoved the
responsibility onto Ellen, and her disappointment at missing the
barbecue and the gathering of her friends did not enter his mind;
for it was a fine spring day and his fields were beautiful and the
birds were singing and he felt too young and frolicsome to think
of anyone else.  Occasionally he burst out with "Peg in a Low-
backed Car" and other Irish ditties or the more lugubrious lament
for Robert Emmet, "She is far from the land where her young hero
sleeps."

He was happy, pleasantly excited over the prospect of spending the
day shouting about the Yankees and the war, and proud of his three
pretty daughters in their bright spreading hoop skirts beneath
foolish little lace parasols.  He gave no thought to his
conversation of the day before with Scarlett, for it had
completely slipped his mind.  He only thought that she was pretty
and a great credit to him and that, today, her eyes were as green
as the hills of Ireland.  The last thought made him think better
of himself, for it had a certain poetic ring to it, and so he
favored the girls with a loud and slightly off-key rendition of
"The Wearin' o' the Green."

Scarlett, looking at him with the affectionate contempt that
mothers feel for small swaggering sons, knew that he would be very
drunk by sundown.  Coming home in the dark, he would try, as
usual, to jump every fence between Twelve Oaks and Tara and, she
hoped, by the mercy of Providence and the good sense of his horse,
would escape breaking his neck.  He would disdain the bridge and
swim his horse through the river and come home roaring, to be put
to bed on the sofa in the office by Pork who always waited up with
a lamp in the front hall on such occasions.

He would ruin his new gray broadcloth suit, which would cause him
to swear horribly in the morning and tell Ellen at great length
how his horse fell off the bridge in the darkness--a palpable lie
which would fool no one but which would be accepted by all and
make him feel very clever.

Pa is a sweet, selfish, irresponsible darling, Scarlett thought,
with a surge of affection for him.  She felt so excited and happy
this morning that she included the whole world, as well as Gerald,
in her affection.  She was pretty and she knew it; she would have
Ashley for her own before the day was over; the sun was warm and
tender and the glory of the Georgia spring was spread before her
eyes.  Along the roadside the blackberry brambles were concealing
with softest green the savage red gulches cut by the winter's
rains, and the bare granite boulders pushing up through the red
earth were being draped with sprangles of Cherokee roses and
compassed about by wild violets of palest purple hue.  Upon the
wooded hills above the river, the dogwood blossoms lay glistening
and white, as if snow still lingered among the greenery.  The
flowering crab trees were bursting their buds and rioting from
delicate white to deepest pink and, beneath the trees where the
sunshine dappled the pine straw, the wild honeysuckle made a
varicolored carpet of scarlet and orange and rose.  There was a
faint wild fragrance of sweet shrub on the breeze and the world
smelled good enough to eat.

"I'll remember how beautiful this day is till I die," thought
Scarlett.  "Perhaps it will be my wedding day!"

And she thought with a tingling in her heart how she and Ashley
might ride swiftly through this beauty of blossom and greenery
this very afternoon, or tonight by moonlight, toward Jonesboro and
a preacher.  Of course, she would have to be remarried by a priest
from Atlanta, but that would be something for Ellen and Gerald to
worry about.  She quailed a little as she thought how white with
mortification Ellen would be at hearing that her daughter had
eloped with another girl's fiance, but she knew Ellen would
forgive her when she saw her happiness.  And Gerald would scold
and bawl but, for all his remarks of yesterday about not wanting
her to marry Ashley, he would be pleased beyond words at an
alliance between his family and the Wilkes.

"But that'll be something to worry about after I'm married," she
thought, tossing the worry from her.

It was impossible to feel anything but palpitating joy in this
warm sun, in this spring, with the chimneys of Twelve Oaks just
beginning to show on the hill across the river.

"I'll live there all my life and I'll see fifty springs like this
and maybe more, and I'll tell my children and my grandchildren how
beautiful this spring was, lovelier than any they'll ever see."
She was so happy at this thought that she joined in the last
chorus of "The Wearin' o' the Green" and won Gerald's shouted
approval.

"I don't know why you're so happy this morning," said Suellen
crossly, for the thought still rankled in her mind that she would
look far better in Scarlett's green silk dancing frock than its
rightful owner would.  And why was Scarlett always so selfish
about lending her clothes and bonnets?  And why did Mother always
back her up, declaring green was not Suellen's color?  "You know
as well as I do that Ashley's engagement is going to be announced
tonight.  Pa said so this morning.  And I know you've been sweet
on him for months."

"That's all you know," said Scarlett, putting out her tongue and
refusing to lose her good humor.  How surprised Miss Sue would be
by this time tomorrow morning!

"Susie, you know that's not so," protested Carreen, shocked.
"It's Brent that Scarlett cares about."

Scarlett turned smiling green eyes upon her younger sister,
wondering how anyone could be so sweet.  The whole family knew
that Carreen's thirteen-year-old heart was set upon Brent
Tarleton, who never gave her a thought except as Scarlett's baby
sister.  When Ellen was not present, the O'Haras teased her to
tears about him.

"Darling, I don't care a thing about Brent," declared Scarlett,
happy enough to be generous.  "And he doesn't care a thing about
me.  Why, he's waiting for you to grow up!"

Carreen's round little face became pink, as pleasure struggled
with incredulity.

"Oh, Scarlett, really?"

"Scarlett, you know Mother said Carreen was too young to think
about beaux yet, and there you go putting ideas in her head."

"Well, go and tattle and see if I care," replied Scarlett.  "You
want to hold Sissy back, because you know she's going to be
prettier than you in a year or so."

"You'll be keeping civil tongues in your heads this day, or I'll
be taking me crop to you," warned Gerald.  "Now whist!  Is it
wheels I'm hearing?  That'll be the Tarletons or the Fontaines."

As they neared the intersecting road that came down the thickly
wooded hill from Mimosa and Fairhill, the sound of hooves and
carriage wheels became plainer and clamorous feminine voices
raised in pleasant dispute sounded from behind the screen of
trees.  Gerald, riding ahead, pulled up his horse and signed to
Toby to stop the carriage where the two roads met.

"'Tis the Tarleton ladies," he announced to his daughters, his
florid face abeam, for excepting Ellen there was no lady in the
County he liked more than the red-haired Mrs. Tarleton.  "And 'tis
herself at the reins.  Ah, there's a woman with fine hands for a
horse!  Feather light and strong as rawhide, and pretty enough to
kiss for all that.  More's the pity none of you have such hands,"
he added, casting fond but reproving glances at his girls.  "With
Carreen afraid of the poor beasts and Sue with hands like sadirons
when it comes to reins and you, Puss--"

"Well, at any rate I've never been thrown," cried Scarlett
indignantly.  "And Mrs. Tarleton takes a toss at every hunt."

"And breaks a collar bone like a man," said Gerald.  "No fainting,
no fussing.  Now, no more of it, for here she comes."

He stood up in his stirrups and took off his hat with a sweep, as
the Tarleton carriage, overflowing with girls in bright dresses
and parasols and fluttering veils, came into view, with Mrs.
Tarleton on the box as Gerald had said.  With her four daughters,
their mammy and their ball dresses in long cardboard boxes
crowding the carriage, there was no room for the coachman.  And,
besides, Beatrice Tarleton never willingly permitted anyone, black
or white, to hold reins when her arms were out of slings.  Frail,
fine-boned, so white of skin that her flaming hair seemed to have
drawn all the color from her face into its vital burnished mass,
she was nevertheless possessed of exuberant health and untiring
energy.  She had borne eight children, as red of hair and as full
of life as she, and had raised them most successfully, so the
County said, because she gave them all the loving neglect and the
stern discipline she gave the colts she bred.  "Curb them but
don't break their spirits," was Mrs. Tarleton's motto.

She loved horses and talked horses constantly.  She understood
them and handled them better than any man in the County.  Colts
overflowed the paddock onto the front lawn, even as her eight
children overflowed the rambling house on the hill, and colts and
sons and daughters and hunting dogs tagged after her as she went
about the plantation.  She credited her horses, especially her red
mare, Nellie, with human intelligence; and if the cares of the
house kept her busy beyond the time when she expected to take her
daily ride, she put the sugar bowl in the hands of some small
pickaninny and said:  "Give Nellie a handful and tell her I'll be
out terrectly."

Except on rare occasions she always wore her riding habit, for
whether she rode or not she always expected to ride and in that
expectation put on her habit upon arising.  Each morning, rain or
shine, Nellie was saddled and walked up and down in front of the
house, waiting for the time when Mrs. Tarleton could spare an hour
away from her duties.  But Fairhill was a difficult plantation to
manage and spare time hard to get, and more often than not Nellie
walked up and down riderless hour after hour, while Beatrice
Tarleton went through the day with the skirt of her habit absently
looped over her arm and six inches of shining boot showing below
it.

Today, dressed in dull black silk over unfashionably narrow hoops,
she still looked as though in her habit, for the dress was as
severely tailored as her riding costume and the small black hat
with its long black plume perched over one warm, twinkling, brown
eye was a replica of the battered old hat she used for hunting.

She waved her whip when she saw Gerald and drew her dancing pair
of red horses to a halt, and the four girls in the back of the
carriage leaned out and gave such vociferous cries of greeting
that the team pranced in alarm.  To a casual observer it would
seem that years had passed since the Tarletons had seen the
O'Haras, instead of only two days.  But they were a sociable
family and liked their neighbors, especially the O'Hara girls.
That is, they liked Suellen and Carreen.  No girl in the County,
with the possible exception of the empty-headed Cathleen Calvert,
really liked Scarlett.

In summers, the County averaged a barbecue and ball nearly every
week, but to the red-haired Tarletons with their enormous capacity
for enjoying themselves, each barbecue and each ball was as
exciting as if it were the first they had ever attended.  They
were a pretty, buxom quartette, so crammed into the carriage that
their hoops and flounces overlapped and their parasols nudged and
bumped together above their wide leghorn sun hats, crowned with
roses and dangling with black velvet chin ribbons.  All shades of
red hair were represented beneath these hats, Hetty's plain red
hair, Camilla's strawberry blonde, Randa's coppery auburn and
small Betsy's carrot top.

"That's a fine bevy, Ma'm," said Gerald gallantly, reining his
horse alongside the carriage.  "But it's far they'll go to beat
their mother."

Mrs. Tarleton rolled her red-brown eyes and sucked in her lower
lip in burlesqued appreciation, and the girls cried, "Ma, stop
making eyes or we'll tell Pa!"  "I vow, Mr. O'Hara, she never
gives us a chance when there's a handsome man like you around!"

Scarlett laughed with the rest at these sallies but, as always,
the freedom with which the Tarletons treated their mother came as
a shock.  They acted as if she were one of themselves and not a
day over sixteen.  To Scarlett, the very idea of saying such
things to her own mother was almost sacrilegious.  And yet--and
yet--there was something very pleasant about the Tarleton girls'
relations with their mother, and they adored her for all that they
criticized and scolded and teased her.  Not, Scarlett loyally
hastened to tell herself, that she would prefer a mother like Mrs.
Tarleton to Ellen, but still it would be fun to romp with a
mother.  She knew that even that thought was disrespectful to
Ellen and felt ashamed of it.  She knew no such troublesome
thoughts ever disturbed the brains under the four flaming thatches
in the carriage and, as always when she felt herself different
from her neighbors, an irritated confusion fell upon her.

Quick though her brain was, it was not made for analysis, but she
half-consciously realized that, for all the Tarleton girls were as
unruly as colts and wild as March hares, there was an unworried
single-mindedness about them that was part of their inheritance.
On both their mother's and their father's side they were
Georgians, north Georgians, only a generation away from pioneers.
They were sure of themselves and of their environment.  They knew
instinctively what they were about, as did the Wilkeses, though in
widely divergent ways, and in them there was no such conflict as
frequently raged in Scarlett's bosom where the blood of a soft-
voiced, overbred Coast aristocrat mingled with the shrewd, earthy
blood of an Irish peasant.  Scarlett wanted to respect and adore
her mother like an idol and to rumple her hair and tease her too.
And she knew she should be altogether one way or the other.  It
was the same conflicting emotion that made her desire to appear a
delicate and high-bred lady with boys and to be, as well, a hoyden
who was not above a few kisses.

"Where's Ellen this morning?" asked Mrs. Tarleton.

"She's after discharging our overseer and stayed home to go over
the accounts with him.  Where's himself and the lads?"

"Oh, they rode over to Twelve Oaks hours ago--to sample the punch
and see if it was strong enough, I dare say, as if they wouldn't
have from now till tomorrow morning to do it!  I'm going to ask
John Wilkes to keep them overnight, even if he has to bed them
down in the stable.  Five men in their cups are just too much for
me.  Up to three, I do very well but--"

Gerald hastily interrupted to change the subject.  He could feel
his own daughters snickering behind his back as they remembered in
what condition he had come home from the Wilkeses' last barbecue
the autumn before.

"And why aren't you riding today, Mrs. Tarleton?  Sure, you don't
look yourself at all without Nellie.  It's a stentor, you are."

"A stentor, me ignorant broth of a boy!" cried Mrs. Tarleton,
aping his brogue.  "You mean a centaur.  Stentor was a man with a
voice like a brass gong."

"Stentor or centaur, 'tis no matter," answered Gerald, unruffled
by his error.  "And 'tis a voice like brass you have, Ma'm, when
you're urging on the hounds, so it is."

"That's one on you, Ma," said Betty.  "I told you you yelled like
a Comanche whenever you saw a fox."

"But not as loud as you yell when Mammy washes your ears,"
returned Mrs. Tarleton.  "And you sixteen!  Well, as to why I'm
not riding today, Nellie foaled early this morning."

"Did she now!" cried Gerald with real interest, his Irishman's
passion for horses shining in his eyes, and Scarlett again felt
the sense of shock in comparing her mother with Mrs. Tarleton.  To
Ellen, mares never foaled nor cows calved.  In fact, hens almost
didn't lay eggs.  Ellen ignored these matters completely.  But
Mrs. Tarleton had no such reticences.

"A little filly, was it?"

"No, a fine little stallion with legs two yards long.  You must
ride over and see him, Mr. O'Hara.  He's a real Tarleton horse.
He's as red as Hetty's curls."

"And looks a lot like Betty, too," said Camilla, and then
disappeared shrieking amid a welter of skirts and pantalets and
bobbing hats, as Betty, who did have a long face, began pinching
her.

"My fillies are feeling their oats this morning," said Mrs.
Tarleton.  "They've been kicking up their heels ever since we
heard the news this morning about Ashley and that little cousin of
his from Atlanta.  What's her name?  Melanie?  Bless the child,
she's a sweet little thing, but I can never remember either her
name or her face.  Our cook is the broad wife of the Wilkes
butler, and he was over last night with the news that the
engagement would be announced tonight and Cookie told us this
morning.  The girls are all excited about it, though I can't see
why.  Everybody's known for years that Ashley would marry her,
that is, if he didn't marry one of his Burr cousins from Macon.
Just like Honey Wilkes is going to marry Melanie's brother,
Charles.  Now, tell me, Mr. O'Hara, is it illegal for the Wilkes
to marry outside of their family?  Because if--"

Scarlett did not hear the rest of the laughing words.  For one
short instant, it was as though the sun had ducked behind a cool
cloud, leaving the world in shadow, taking the color out of
things.  The freshly green foliage looked sickly, the dogwood
pallid, and the flowering crab, so beautifully pink a moment ago,
faded and dreary.  Scarlett dug her fingers into the upholstery of
the carriage and for a moment her parasol wavered.  It was one
thing to know that Ashley was engaged but it was another to hear
people talk about it so casually.  Then her courage flowed
strongly back and the sun came out again and the landscape glowed
anew.  She knew Ashley loved her.  That was certain.  And she
smiled as she thought how surprised Mrs. Tarleton would be when no
engagement was announced that night--how surprised if there were
an elopement.  And she'd tell neighbors what a sly boots Scarlett
was to sit there and listen to her talk about Melanie when all the
time she and Ashley--  She dimpled at her own thoughts and Betty,
who had been watching sharply the effect of her mother's words,
sank back with a small puzzled frown.

"I don't care what you say, Mr. O'Hara," Mrs. Tarleton was saying
emphatically.  "It's all wrong, this marrying of cousins.  It's
bad enough for Ashley to be marrying the Hamilton child, but for
Honey to be marrying that pale-looking Charles Hamilton--"

"Honey'll never catch anybody else if she doesn't marry Charlie,"
said Randa, cruel and secure in her own popularity.  "She's never
had another beau except him.  And he's never acted very sweet on
her, for all that they're engaged.  Scarlett, you remember how he
ran after you last Christmas--"

"Don't be a cat, Miss," said her mother.  "Cousins shouldn't
marry, even second cousins.  It weakens the strain.  It isn't like
horses.  You can breed a mare to a brother or a sire to a daughter
and get good results if you know your blood strains, but in people
it just doesn't work.  You get good lines, perhaps, but no
stamina.  You--"

"Now, Ma'm, I'm taking issue with you on that!  Can you name me
better people than the Wilkes?  And they've been intermarrying
since Brian Boru was a boy."

"And high time they stopped it, for it's beginning to show.  Oh,
not Ashley so much, for he's a good-looking devil, though even he--
But look at those two washed-out-looking Wilkes girls, poor
things!  Nice girls, of course, but washed out.  And look at
little Miss Melanie.  Thin as a rail and delicate enough for the
wind to blow away and no spirit at all.  Not a notion of her own.
'No, Ma'm!' 'Yes, Ma'm!'  That's all she has to say.  You see what
I mean?  That family needs new blood, fine vigorous blood like my
red heads or your Scarlett.  Now, don't misunderstand me.  The
Wilkes are fine folks in their way, and you know I'm fond of them
all, but be frank!  They are overbred and inbred too, aren't they?
They'll do fine on a dry track, a fast track, but mark my words, I
don't believe the Wilkes can run on a mud track.  I believe the
stamina has been bred out of them, and when the emergency arises I
don't believe they can run against odds.  Dry-weather stock.  Give
me a big horse who can run in any weather!  And their intermarrying
has made them different from other folks around here.  Always
fiddling with the piano or sticking their heads in a book.  I do
believe Ashley would rather read than hunt!  Yes, I honestly believe
that, Mr. O'Hara!  And just look at the bones on them.  Too slender.
They need dams and sires with strength--"

"Ah-ah-hum," said Gerald, suddenly and guiltily aware that the
conversation, a most interesting and entirely proper one to him,
would seem quite otherwise to Ellen.  In fact, he knew she would
never recover should she learn that her daughters had been exposed
to so frank a conversation.  But Mrs. Tarleton was, as usual, deaf
to all other ideas when pursuing her favorite topic, breeding,
whether it be horses or humans.

"I know what I'm talking about because I had some cousins who
married each other and I give you my word their children all
turned out as popeyed as bullfrogs, poor things.  And when my
family wanted me to marry a second cousin, I bucked like a colt.
I said, 'No, Ma.  Not for me.  My children will all have spavins
and heaves.'  Well, Ma fainted when I said that about spavins, but
I stood firm and Grandma backed me up.  She knew a lot about horse
breeding too, you see, and said I was right.  And she helped me
run away with Mr. Tarleton.  And look at my children!  Big and
healthy and not a sickly one or a runt among them, though Boyd is
only five feet ten.  Now, the Wilkes--"

"Not meaning to change the subject, Ma'm," broke in Gerald
hurriedly, for he had noticed Carreen's bewildered look and the
avid curiosity on Suellen's face and feared lest they might ask
Ellen embarrassing questions which would reveal how inadequate a
chaperon he was.  Puss, he was glad to notice, appeared to be
thinking of other matters as a lady should.

Betty Tarleton rescued him from his predicament.

"Good Heavens, Ma, do let's get on!" she cried impatiently.  "This
sun is broiling me and I can just hear freckles popping out on my
neck."

"Just a minute, Ma'm, before you go," said Gerald.  "But what have
you decided to do about selling us the horses for the Troop?  War
may break any day now and the boys want the matter settled.  It's
a Clayton County troop and it's Clayton County horses we want for
them.  But you, obstinate creature that you are, are still
refusing to sell us your fine beasts."

"Maybe there won't be any war," Mrs. Tarleton temporized, her mind
diverted completely from the Wilkeses' odd marriage habits.

"Why, Ma'm, you can't--"

"Ma," Betty interrupted again, "can't you and Mr. O'Hara talk
about the horses at Twelve Oaks as well as here?"

"That's just it, Miss Betty," said Gerald.  "And I won't be
keeping you but one minute by the clock.  We'll be getting to
Twelve Oaks in a little bit, and every man there, old and young,
wanting to know about the horses.  Ah, but it's breaking me heart
to see such a fine pretty lady as your mother so stingy with her
beasts!  Now, where's your patriotism, Mrs. Tarleton?  Does the
Confederacy mean nothing to you at all?"

"Ma," cried small Betsy, "Randa's sitting on my dress and I'm
getting all wrinkled."

"Well, push Randa off you, Betsy, and hush.  Now, listen to me,
Gerald O'Hara," she retorted, her eyes beginning to snap.  "Don't
you go throwing the Confederacy in my face!  I reckon the
Confederacy means as much to me as it does to you, me with four
boys in the Troop and you with none.  But my boys can take care of
themselves and my horses can't.  I'd gladly give the horses free
of charge if I knew they were going to be ridden by boys I know,
gentlemen used to thoroughbreds.  No, I wouldn't hesitate a
minute.  But let my beauties be at the mercy of back-woodsmen and
Crackers who are used to riding mules!  No, sir!  I'd have
nightmares thinking they were being ridden with saddle galls and
not groomed properly.  Do you think I'd let ignorant fools ride my
tender-mouthed darlings and saw their mouths to pieces and beat
them till their spirits were broken?  Why, I've got goose flesh
this minute, just thinking about it!  No, Mr. O'Hara, you're
mighty nice to want my horses, but you'd better go to Atlanta and
buy some old plugs for your clodhoppers.  They'll never know the
difference."

"Ma, can't we please go on?" asked Camilla, joining the impatient
chorus.  "You know mighty well you're going to end up giving them
your darlings anyhow.  When Pa and the boys get through talking
about the Confederacy needing them and so on, you'll cry and let
them go."

Mrs. Tarleton grinned and shook the lines.

"I'll do no such thing," she said, touching the horses lightly
with the whip.  The carriage went off swiftly.

"That's a fine woman," said Gerald, putting on his hat and taking
his place beside his own carriage.  "Drive on, Toby.  We'll wear
her down and get the horses yet.  Of course, she's right.  She's
right.  If a man's not a gentleman, he's no business on a horse.
The infantry is the place for him.  But more's the pity, there's
not enough planters' sons in this County to make up a full troop.
What did you say, Puss?"

"Pa, please ride behind us or in front of us.  You kick up such a
heap of dust that we're choking," said Scarlett, who felt that she
could endure conversation no longer.  It distracted her from her
thoughts and she was very anxious to arrange both her thoughts and
her face in attractive lines before reaching Twelve Oaks.  Gerald
obediently put spurs to his horse and was off in a red cloud after
the Tarleton carriage where he could continue his horsy conversation.



CHAPTER VI


They crossed the river and the carriage mounted the hill.  Even
before Twelve Oaks came into view Scarlett saw a haze of smoke
hanging lazily in the tops of the tall trees and smelled the
mingled savory odors of burning hickory logs and roasting pork and
mutton.

The barbecue pits, which had been slowly burning since last night,
would now be long troughs of rose-red embers, with the meats
turning on spits above them and the juices trickling down and
hissing into the coals.  Scarlett knew that the fragrance carried
on the faint breeze came from the grove of great oaks in the rear
of the big house.  John Wilkes always held his barbecues there, on
the gentle slope leading down to the rose garden, a pleasant shady
place and a far pleasanter place, for instance, than that used by
the Calverts.  Mrs. Calvert did not like barbecue food and
declared that the smells remained in the house for days, so her
guests always sweltered on a flat unshaded spot a quarter of a
mile from the house.  But John Wilkes, famed throughout the state
for his hospitality, really knew how to give a barbecue.

The long trestled picnic tables, covered with the finest of the
Wilkeses' linen, always stood under the thickest shade, with
backless benches on either side; and chairs, hassocks and cushions
from the house were scattered about the glade for those who did
not fancy the benches.  At a distance great enough to keep the
smoke away from the guests were the long pits where the meats
cooked and the huge iron wash-pots from which the succulent odors
of barbecue sauce and Brunswick stew floated.  Mr. Wilkes always
had at least a dozen darkies busy running back and forth with
trays to serve the guests.  Over behind the barns there was always
another barbecue pit, where the house servants and the coachmen
and maids of the guests had their own feast of hoecakes and yams
and chitterlings, that dish of hog entrails so dear to negro
hearts, and, in season, watermelons enough to satiate.

As the smell of crisp fresh pork came to her, Scarlett wrinkled
her nose appreciatively, hoping that by the time it was cooked she
would feel some appetite.  As it was she was so full of food and
so tightly laced that she feared every moment she was going to
belch.  That would be fatal, as only old men and very old ladies
could belch without fear of social disapproval.

They topped the rise and the white house reared its perfect
symmetry before her, tall of columns, wide of verandas, flat of
roof, beautiful as a woman is beautiful who is so sure of her
charm that she can be generous and gracious to all.  Scarlett
loved Twelve Oaks even more than Tara, for it had a stately
beauty, a mellowed dignity that Gerald's house did not possess.

The wide curving driveway was full of saddle horses and carriages
and guests alighting and calling greetings to friends.  Grinning
negroes, excited as always at a party, were leading the animals to
the barnyard to be unharnessed and unsaddled for the day.  Swarms
of children, black and white, ran yelling about the newly green
lawn, playing hopscotch and tag and boasting how much they were
going to eat.  The wide hall which ran from front to back of the
house was swarming with people, and as the O'Hara carriage drew up
at the front steps, Scarlett saw girls in crinolines, bright as
butterflies, going up and coming down the stairs from the second
floor, arms about each other's waists, stopping to lean over the
delicate handrail of the banisters, laughing and calling to young
men in the hall below them.

Through the open French windows, she caught glimpses of the older
women seated in the drawing room, sedate in dark silks as they sat
fanning themselves and talking of babies and sicknesses and who
had married whom and why.  The Wilkes butler, Tom, was hurrying
through the halls, a silver tray in his hands, bowing and
grinning, as he offered tall glasses to young men in fawn and gray
trousers and fine ruffled linen shirts.

The sunny front veranda was thronged with guests.  Yes, the whole
County was here, thought Scarlett.  The four Tarleton boys and
their father leaned against the tall columns, the twins, Stuart
and Brent, side by side inseparable as usual, Boyd and Tom with
their father, James Tarleton.  Mr. Calvert was standing close by
the side of his Yankee wife, who even after fifteen years in
Georgia never seemed to quite belong anywhere.  Everyone was very
polite and kind to her because he felt sorry for her, but no one
could forget that she had compounded her initial error of birth by
being the governess of Mr. Calvert's children.  The two Calvert
boys, Raiford and Cade, were there with their dashing blonde
sister, Cathleen, teasing the dark-faced Joe Fontaine and Sally
Munroe, his pretty bride-to-be.  Alex and Tony Fontaine were
whispering in the ears of Dimity Munroe and sending her into gales
of giggles.  There were families from as far as Lovejoy, ten miles
away, and from Fayetteville and Jonesboro, a few even from Atlanta
and Macon.  The house seemed bursting with the crowd, and a
ceaseless babble of talking and laughter and giggles and shrill
feminine squeaks and screams rose and fell.

On the porch steps stood John Wilkes, silver-haired, erect,
radiating the quiet charm and hospitality that was as warm and
never failing as the sun of Georgia summer.  Beside him Honey
Wilkes, so called because she indiscriminately addressed everyone
from her father to the field hands by that endearment, fidgeted
and giggled as she called greetings to the arriving guests.

Honey's nervously obvious desire to be attractive to every man in
sight contrasted sharply with her father's poise, and Scarlett had
the thought that perhaps there was something in what Mrs. Tarleton
said, after all.  Certainly the Wilkes men got the family looks.
The thick deep-gold lashes that set off the gray eyes of John
Wilkes and Ashley were sparse and colorless in the faces of Honey
and her sister India.  Honey had the odd lashless look of a
rabbit, and India could be described by no other word than plain.

India was nowhere to be seen, but Scarlett knew she probably was
in the kitchen giving final instructions to the servants.  Poor
India, thought Scarlett, she's had so much trouble keeping house
since her mother died that she's never had the chance to catch any
beau except Stuart Tarleton, and it certainly wasn't my fault if
he thought I was prettier than she.

John Wilkes came down the steps to offer his arm to Scarlett.  As
she descended from the carriage, she saw Suellen smirk and knew
that she must have picked out Frank Kennedy in the crowd.

If I couldn't catch a better beau than that old maid in britches!
she thought contemptuously, as she stepped to the ground and
smiled her thanks to John Wilkes.

Frank Kennedy was hurrying to the carriage to assist Suellen, and
Suellen was bridling in a way that made Scarlett want to slap her.
Frank Kennedy might own more land than anyone in the County and he
might have a very kind heart, but these things counted for nothing
against the fact that he was forty, slight and nervous and had a
thin ginger-colored beard and an old-maidish, fussy way about him.
However, remembering her plan, Scarlett smothered her contempt and
cast such a flashing smile of greeting at him that he stopped
short, his arm outheld to Suellen and goggled at Scarlett in
pleased bewilderment.

Scarlett's eyes searched the crowd for Ashley, even while she made
pleasant small talk with John Wilkes, but he was not on the porch.
There were cries of greeting from a dozen voices and Stuart and
Brent Tarleton moved toward her.  The Munroe girls rushed up to
exclaim over her dress, and she was speedily the center of a
circle of voices that rose higher and higher in efforts to be
heard above the din.  But where was Ashley?  And Melanie and
Charles?  She tried not to be obvious as she looked about and
peered down the hall into the laughing group inside.

As she chattered and laughed and cast quick glances into the house
and the yard, her eyes fell on a stranger, standing alone in the
hall, staring at her in a cool impertinent way that brought her up
sharply with a mingled feeling of feminine pleasure that she had
attracted a man and an embarrassed sensation that her dress was
too low in the bosom.  He looked quite old, at least thirty-five.
He was a tall man and powerfully built.  Scarlett thought she had
never seen a man with such wide shoulders, so heavy with muscles,
almost too heavy for gentility.  When her eye caught his, he
smiled, showing animal-white teeth below a close-clipped black
mustache.  He was dark of face, swarthy as a pirate, and his eyes
were as bold and black as any pirate's appraising a galleon to be
scuttled or a maiden to be ravished.  There was a cool recklessness
in his face and a cynical humor in his mouth as he smiled at her,
and Scarlett caught her breath.  She felt that she should be
insulted by such a look and was annoyed with herself because she did
not feel insulted.  She did not know who he could be, but there was
undeniably a look of good blood in his dark face.  It showed in the
thin hawk nose over the full red lips, the high forehead and the
wide-set eyes.

She dragged her eyes away from his without smiling back, and he
turned as someone called:  "Rhett!  Rhett Butler!  Come here!  I
want you to meet the most hardhearted girl in Georgia."

Rhett Butler?  The name had a familiar sound, somehow connected
with something pleasantly scandalous, but her mind was on Ashley
and she dismissed the thought.

"I must run upstairs and smooth my hair," she told Stuart and
Brent, who were trying to get her cornered from the crowd.  "You
boys wait for me and don't run off with any other girl or I'll be
furious."

She could see that Stuart was going to be difficult to handle
today if she flirted with anyone else.  He had been drinking and
wore the arrogant looking-for-a-fight expression that she knew from
experience meant trouble.  She paused in the hall to speak to
friends and to greet India who was emerging from the back of the
house, her hair untidy and tiny beads of perspiration on her
forehead.  Poor India!  It would be bad enough to have pale hair
and eyelashes and a jutting chin that meant a stubborn disposition,
without being twenty years old and an old maid in the bargain.  She
wondered if India resented very much her taking Stuart away from
her.  Lots of people said she was still in love with him, but then
you could never tell what a Wilkes was thinking about.  If she did
resent it, she never gave any sign of it, treating Scarlett with the
same slightly aloof, kindly courtesy she had always shown her.

Scarlett spoke pleasantly to her and started up the wide stairs.
As she did, a shy voice behind her called her name and, turning,
she saw Charles Hamilton.  He was a nice-looking boy with a riot
of soft brown curls on his white forehead and eyes as deep brown,
as clean and as gentle as a collie dog's.  He was well turned out
in mustard-colored trousers and black coat and his pleated shirt
was topped by the widest and most fashionable of black cravats.
A faint blush was creeping over his face as she turned for he was
timid with girls.  Like most shy men he greatly admired airy,
vivacious, always-at-ease girls like Scarlett.  She had never
given him more than perfunctory courtesy before, and so the
beaming smile of pleasure with which she greeted him and the two
hands outstretched to his almost took his breath away.

"Why Charles Hamilton, you handsome old thing, you!  I'll bet you
came all the way down here from Atlanta just to break my poor
heart!"

Charles almost stuttered with excitement, holding her warm little
hands in his and looking into the dancing green eyes.  This was
the way girls talked to other boys but never to him.  He never
knew why but girls always treated him like a younger brother and
were very kind, but never bothered to tease him.  He had always
wanted girls to flirt and frolic with him as they did with boys
much less handsome and less endowed with this world's goods than
he.  But on the few occasions when this had happened he could
never think of anything to say and he suffered agonies of
embarrassment at his dumbness.  Then he lay awake at night
thinking of all the charming gallantries he might have employed;
but he rarely got a second chance, for the girls left him alone
after a trial or two.

Even with Honey, with whom he had an unspoken understanding of
marriage when he came into his property next fall, he was
diffident and silent.  At times, he had an ungallant feeling that
Honey's coquetries and proprietary airs were no credit to him, for
she was so boy-crazy he imagined she would use them on any man who
gave her the opportunity.  Charles was not excited over the
prospect of marrying her, for she stirred in him none of the
emotions of wild romance that his beloved books had assured him
were proper for a lover.  He had always yearned to be loved by
some beautiful, dashing creature full of fire and mischief.

And here was Scarlett O'Hara teasing him about breaking her heart!

He tried to think of something to say and couldn't, and silently
he blessed her because she kept up a steady chatter which relieved
him of any necessity for conversation.  It was too good to be
true.

"Now, you wait right here till I come back, for I want to eat
barbecue with you.  And don't you go off philandering with those
other girls, because I'm mighty jealous," came the incredible
words from red lips with a dimple on each side; and briskly black
lashes swept demurely over green eyes.

"I won't," he finally managed to breathe, never dreaming that she
was thinking he looked like a calf waiting for the butcher.

Tapping him lightly on the arm with her folded fan, she turned to
start up the stairs and her eyes again fell on the man called
Rhett Butler who stood alone a few feet away from Charles.
Evidently he had overheard the whole conversation, for he grinned
up at her as maliciously as a tomcat, and again his eyes went over
her, in a gaze totally devoid of the deference she was accustomed
to.

"God's nightgown!" said Scarlett to herself in indignation, using
Gerald's favorite oath.  "He looks as if--as if he knew what I
looked like without my shimmy," and, tossing her head, she went up
the steps.

In the bedroom where the wraps were laid, she found Cathleen
Calvert preening before the mirror and biting her lips to make
them look redder.  There were fresh roses in her sash that matched
her cheeks, and her cornflower-blue eyes were dancing with
excitement.

"Cathleen," said Scarlett, trying to pull the corsage of her dress
higher, "who is that nasty man downstairs named Butler?"

"My dear, don't you know?" whispered Cathleen excitedly, a weather
eye on the next room where Dilcey and the Wilkes girls' mammy were
gossiping.  "I can't imagine how Mr. Wilkes must feel having him
here, but he was visiting Mr. Kennedy in Jonesboro--something
about buying cotton--and, of course, Mr. Kennedy had to bring him
along with him.  He couldn't just go off and leave him."

"What is the matter with him?"

"My dear, he isn't received!"

"Not really!"

"No."

Scarlett digested this in silence, for she had never before been
under the same roof with anyone who was not received.  It was very
exciting.

"What did he do?"

"Oh, Scarlett, he has the most terrible reputation.  His name is
Rhett Butler and he's from Charleston and his folks are some of
the nicest people there, but they won't even speak to him.  Caro
Rhett told me about him last summer.  He isn't any kin to her
family, but she knows all about him, everybody does.  He was
expelled from West Point.  Imagine!  And for things too bad for
Caro to know.  And then there was that business about the girl he
didn't marry."

"Do tell me!"

"Darling, don't you know anything?  Caro told me all about it last
summer and her mama would die if she thought Caro even knew about
it.  Well, this Mr. Butler took a Charleston girl out buggy
riding.  I never did know who she was, but I've got my suspicions.
She couldn't have been very nice or she wouldn't have gone out
with him in the late afternoon without a chaperon.  And, my dear,
they stayed out nearly all night and walked home finally, saying
the horse had run away and smashed the buggy and they had gotten
lost in the woods.  And guess what--"

"I can't guess.  Tell me," said Scarlett enthusiastically, hoping
for the worst.

"He refused to marry her the next day!"

"Oh," said Scarlett, her hopes dashed.

"He said he hadn't--er--done anything to her and he didn't see why
he should marry her.  And, of course, her brother called him out,
and Mr. Butler said he'd rather be shot than marry a stupid fool.
And so they fought a duel and Mr. Butler shot the girl's brother
and he died, and Mr. Butler had to leave Charleston and now nobody
receives him," finished Cathleen triumphantly, and just in time,
for Dilcey came back into the room to oversee the toilet of her
charge.

"Did she have a baby?" whispered Scarlett in Cathleen's ear.

Cathleen shook her head violently.  "But she was ruined just the
same," she hissed back.

I wish I had gotten Ashley to compromise me, thought Scarlett
suddenly.  He'd be too much of a gentleman not to marry me.  But
somehow, unbidden, she had a feeling of respect for Rhett Butler
for refusing to marry a girl who was a fool.



Scarlett sat on a high rosewood ottoman, under the shade of a huge
oak in the rear of the house, her flounces and ruffles billowing
about her and two inches of green morocco slippers--all that a
lady could show and still remain a lady--peeping from beneath
them.  She had scarcely touched plate in her hands and seven
cavaliers about her.  The barbecue had reached its peak and the
warm air was full of laughter and talk, the click of silver on
porcelain and the rich heavy smells of roasting meats and redolent
gravies.  Occasionally when the slight breeze veered, puffs of
smoke from the long barbecue pits floated over the crowd and were
greeted with squeals of mock dismay from the ladies and violent
flappings of palmetto fans.

Most of the young ladies were seated with partners on the long
benches that faced the tables, but Scarlett, realizing that a girl
has only two sides and only one man can sit on each of these
sides, had elected to sit apart so she could gather about her as
many men as possible.

Under the arbor sat the married women, their dark dresses decorous
notes in the surrounding color and gaiety.  Matrons, regardless of
their ages, always grouped together apart from the bright-eyed
girls, beaux and laughter, for there were no married belles in the
South.  From Grandma Fontaine, who was belching frankly with the
privilege of her age, to seventeen-year-old Alice Munroe,
struggling against the nausea of a first pregnancy, they had their
heads together in the endless genealogical and obstetrical
discussions that made such gatherings very pleasant and
instructive affairs.

Casting contemptuous glances at them, Scarlett thought that they
looked like a clump of fat crows.  Married women never had any
fun.  It did not occur to her that if she married Ashley she would
automatically be relegated to arbors and front parlors with staid
matrons in dull silks, as staid and dull as they and not a part of
the fun and frolicking.  Like most girls, her imagination carried
her just as far as the altar and no further.  Besides, she was too
unhappy now to pursue an abstraction.

She dropped her eyes to her plate and nibbled daintily on a beaten
biscuit with an elegance and an utter lack of appetite that would
have won Mammy's approval.  For all that she had a superfluity of
beaux, she had never been more miserable in her life.  In some way
that she could not understand, her plans of last night had failed
utterly so far as Ashley was concerned.  She had attracted other
beaux by the dozens, but not Ashley, and all the fears of
yesterday afternoon were sweeping back upon her, making her heart
beat fast and then slow, and color flame and whiten in her cheeks.

Ashley had made no attempt to join the circle about her, in fact
she had not had a word alone with him since arriving, or even
spoken to him since their first greeting.  He had come forward to
welcome her when she came into the back garden, but Melanie had
been on his arm then, Melanie who hardly came up to his shoulder.

She was a tiny, frailly built girl, who gave the appearance of a
child masquerading in her mother's enormous hoop skirts--an
illusion that was heightened by the shy, almost frightened look in
her too large brown eyes.  She had a cloud of curly dark hair
which was so sternly repressed beneath its net that no vagrant
tendrils escaped, and this dark mass, with its long widow's peak,
accentuated the heart shape of her face.  Too wide across the
cheek bones, too pointed at the chin, it was a sweet, timid face
but a plain face, and she had no feminine tricks of allure to make
observers forget its plainness.  She looked--and was--as simple as
earth, as good as bread, as transparent as spring water.  But for
all her plainness of feature and smallness of stature, there was a
sedate dignity about her movements that was oddly touching and far
older than her seventeen years.

Her gray organdie dress, with its cherry-colored satin sash,
disguised with its billows and ruffles how childishly undeveloped
her body was, and the yellow hat with long cherry streamers made
her creamy skin glow.  Her heavy earbobs with their long gold
fringe hung down from loops of tidily netted hair, swinging close
to her brown eyes, eyes that had the still gleam of a forest pool
in winter when brown leaves shine up through quiet water.

She had smiled with timid liking when she greeted Scarlett and
told her how pretty her green dress was, and Scarlett had been
hard put to be even civil in reply, so violently did she want to
speak alone with Ashley.  Since then, Ashley had sat on a stool at
Melanie's feet, apart from the other guests, and talked quietly
with her, smiling the slow drowsy smile that Scarlett loved.  What
made matters worse was that under his smile a little sparkle had
come into Melanie's eyes, so that even Scarlett had to admit that
she looked almost pretty.  As Melanie looked at Ashley, her plain
face lit up as with an inner fire, for if ever a loving heart
showed itself upon a face, it was showing now on Melanie
Hamilton's.

Scarlett tried to keep her eyes from these two but could not, and
after each glance she redoubled her gaiety with her cavaliers,
laughing, saying daring things, teasing, tossing her head at their
compliments until her earrings danced.  She said "fiddle-dee-dee"
many times, declared that the truth wasn't in any of them, and
vowed that she'd never believe anything any man told her.  But
Ashley did not seem to notice her at all.  He only looked up at
Melanie and talked on, and Melanie looked down at him with an
expression that radiated the fact that she belonged to him.

So, Scarlett was miserable.

To the outward eye, never had a girl less cause to be miserable.
She was undoubtedly the belle of the barbecue, the center of
attention.  The furore she was causing among the men, coupled with
the heart burnings of the other girls, would have pleased her
enormously at any other time.

Charles Hamilton, emboldened by her notice, was firmly planted on
her right, refusing to be dislodged by the combined efforts of the
Tarleton twins.  He held her fan in one hand and his untouched
plate of barbecue in the other and stubbornly refused to meet the
eyes of Honey, who seemed on the verge of an outburst of tears.
Cade lounged gracefully on her left, plucking at her skirt to
attract her attention and staring up with smoldering eyes at
Stuart.  Already the air was electric between him and the twins
and rude words had passed.  Frank Kennedy fussed about like a hen
with one chick, running back and forth from the shade of the oak
to the tables to fetch dainties to tempt Scarlett, as if there
were not a dozen servants there for that purpose.  As a result,
Suellen's sullen resentment had passed beyond the point of
ladylike concealment and she glowered at Scarlett.  Small Carreen
could have cried because, for all Scarlett's encouraging words
that morning, Brent had done no more than say "Hello, Sis" and
jerk her hair ribbon before turning his full attention to
Scarlett.  Usually he was so kind and treated her with a careless
deference that made her feel grown up, and Carreen secretly
dreamed of the day when she would put her hair up and her skirts
down and receive him as a real beau.  And now it seemed that
Scarlett had him.  The Munroe girls were concealing their chagrin
at the defection of the swarthy Fontaine boys, but they were
annoyed at the way Tony and Alex stood about the circle, jockeying
for a position near Scarlett should any of the others arise from
their places.

They telegraphed their disapproval of Scarlett's conduct to Hetty
Tarleton by delicately raised eyebrows.  "Fast" was the only word
for Scarlett.  Simultaneously, the three young ladies raised lacy
parasols, said they had had quite enough to eat, thank you, and,
laying light fingers on the arms of the men nearest them, clamored
sweetly to see the rose garden, the spring and the summerhouse.
This strategic retreat in good order was not lost on a woman
present or observed by a man.

Scarlett giggled as she saw three men dragged out of the line of
her charms to investigate landmarks familiar to the girls from
childhood, and cut her eye sharply to see if Ashley had taken
note.  But he was playing with the ends of Melanie's sash and
smiling up at her.  Pain twisted Scarlett's heart.  She felt that
she could claw Melanie's ivory skin till the blood ran and take
pleasure in doing it.

As her eyes wandered from Melanie, she caught the gaze of Rhett
Butler, who was not mixing with the crowd but standing apart
talking to John Wilkes.  He had been watching her and when she
looked at him he laughed outright.  Scarlett had an uneasy feeling
that this man who was not received was the only one present who
knew what lay behind her wild gaiety and that it was affording him
sardonic amusement.  She could have clawed him with pleasure too.

"If I can just live through this barbecue till this afternoon,"
she thought, "all the girls will go upstairs to take naps to be
fresh for tonight and I'll stay downstairs and get to talk to
Ashley.  Surely he must have noticed how popular I am."  She
soothed her heart with another hope:  "Of course, he has to be
attentive to Melanie because, after all, she is his cousin and she
isn't popular at all, and if he didn't look out for her she'd just
be a wallflower."

She took new courage at this thought and redoubled her efforts in
the direction of Charles, whose brown eyes glowed down eagerly at
her.  It was a wonderful day for Charles, a dream day, and he had
fallen in love with Scarlett with no effort at all.  Before this
new emotion, Honey receded into a dim haze.  Honey was a shrill-
voiced sparrow and Scarlett a gleaming hummingbird.  She teased
him and favored him and asked him questions and answered them
herself, so that he appeared very clever without having to say a
word.  The other boys were puzzled and annoyed by her obvious
interest in him, for they knew Charles was too shy to hitch two
consecutive words together, and politeness was being severely
strained to conceal their growing rage.  Everyone was smoldering,
and it would have been a positive triumph for Scarlett, except for
Ashley.

When the last forkful of pork and chicken and mutton had been
eaten, Scarlett hoped the time had come when India would rise and
suggest that the ladies retire to the house.  It was two o'clock
and the sun was warm overhead, but India, wearied with the three-
day preparations for the barbecue, was only too glad to remain
sitting beneath the arbor, shouting remarks to a deaf old
gentleman from Fayetteville.

A lazy somnolence descended on the crowd.  The negroes idled
about, clearing the long tables on which the food had been laid.
The laughter and talking became less animated and groups here and
there fell silent.  All were waiting for their hostess to signal
the end of the morning's festivities.  Palmetto fans were wagging
more slowly, and several gentlemen were nodding from the heat and
overloaded stomachs.  The barbecue was over and all were content
to take their ease while sun was at its height.

In this interval between the morning party and the evening's ball,
they seemed a placid, peaceful lot.  Only the young men retained
the restless energy which had filled the whole throng a short
while before.  Moving from group to group, drawling in their soft
voices, they were as handsome as blooded stallions and as
dangerous.  The languor of midday had taken hold of the gathering,
but underneath lurked tempers that could rise to killing heights
in a second and flare out as quickly.  Men and women, they were
beautiful and wild, all a little violent under their pleasant ways
and only a little tamed.

Some time dragged by while the sun grew hotter, and Scarlett and
others looked again toward India.  Conversation was dying out
when, in the lull, everyone in the grove heard Gerald's voice
raised in furious accents.  Standing some little distance away
from the barbecue tables, he was at the peak of an argument with
John Wilkes.

"God's nightgown, man!  Pray for a peaceable settlement with the
Yankees after we've fired on the rascals at Fort Sumter?
Peaceable?  The South should show by arms that she cannot be
insulted and that she is not leaving the Union by the Union's
kindness but by her own strength!"

"Oh, my God!" thought Scarlett.  "He's done it!  Now, we'll all
sit here till midnight."

In an instant, the somnolence had fled from the lounging throng
and something electric went snapping through the air.  The men
sprang from benches and chairs, arms in wide gestures, voices
clashing for the right to be heard above other voices.  There had
been no talk of politics or impending war all during the morning,
because of Mr. Wilkes' request that the ladies should not be
bored.  But now Gerald had bawled the words "Fort Sumter," and
every man present forgot his host's admonition.

"Of course we'll fight--"  "Yankee thieves--"  "We could lick them
in a month--"  "Why, one Southerner can lick twenty Yankees--"
"Teach them a lesson they won't soon forget--"  "Peaceably?  They
won't let us go in peace--"  "No, look how Mr. Lincoln insulted
our Commissioners!"  "Yes, kept them hanging around for weeks--
swearing he'd have Sumter evacuated!"  "They want war; we'll make
them sick of war--"  And above all the voices, Gerald's boomed.
All Scarlett could hear was "States' rights, by God!" shouted over
and over.  Gerald was having an excellent time, but not his
daughter.

Secession, war--these words long since had become acutely boring
to Scarlett from much repetition, but now she hated the sound of
them, for they meant that the men would stand there for hours
haranguing one another and she would have no chance to corner
Ashley.  Of course there would be no war and the men all knew it.
They just loved to talk and hear themselves talk.

Charles Hamilton had not risen with the others and, finding
himself comparatively alone with Scarlett, he leaned closer and,
with the daring born of new love, whispered a confession.

"Miss O'Hara--I--I had already decided that if we did fight, I'd
go over to South Carolina and join a troop there.  It's said that
Mr. Wade Hampton is organizing a cavalry troop, and of course I
would want to go with him.  He's a splendid person and was my
father's best friend."

Scarlett thought, "What am I supposed to do--give three cheers?"
for Charles' expression showed that he was baring his heart's
secrets to her.  She could think of nothing to say and so merely
looked at him, wondering why men were such fools as to think women
interested in such matters.  He took her expression to mean
stunned approbation and went on rapidly, daringly--

"If I went--would--would you be sorry, Miss O'Hara?"

"I should cry into my pillow every night," said Scarlett, meaning
to be flippant, but he took the statement at face value and went
red with pleasure.  Her hand was concealed in the folds of her
dress and he cautiously wormed his hand to it and squeezed it,
overwhelmed at his own boldness and at her acquiescence.

"Would you pray for me?"

"What a fool!" thought Scarlett bitterly, casting a surreptitious
glance about her in the hope of being rescued from the conversation.

"Would you?"

"Oh--yes, indeed, Mr. Hamilton.  Three Rosaries a night, at
least!"

Charles gave a swift look about him, drew in his breath, stiffened
the muscles of his stomach.  They were practically alone and he
might never get another such opportunity.  And, even given another
such Godsent occasion, his courage might fail him.

"Miss O'Hara--I must tell you something.  I--I love you!"

"Um?" said Scarlett absently, trying to peer through the crowd of
arguing men to where Ashley still sat talking at Melanie's feet.

"Yes!" whispered Charles, in a rapture that she had neither
laughed, screamed nor fainted, as he had always imagined young
girls did under such circumstances.  "I love you!  You are the
most--the most--" and he found his tongue for the first time in
his life.  "The most beautiful girl I've ever known and the
sweetest and the kindest, and you have the dearest ways and I love
you with all my heart.  I cannot hope that you could love anyone
like me but, my dear Miss O'Hara, if you can give me any
encouragement, I will do anything in the world to make you love
me.  I will--"

Charles stopped, for he couldn't think of anything difficult
enough of accomplishment to really prove to Scarlett the depth of
his feeling, so he said simply:  "I want to marry you."

Scarlett came back to earth with a jerk, at the sound of the word
"marry."  She had been thinking of marriage and of Ashley, and she
looked at Charles with poorly concealed irritation.  Why must this
calf-like fool intrude his feelings on this particular day when
she was so worried she was about to lose her mind?  She looked
into the pleading brown eyes and she saw none of the beauty of a
shy boy's first love, of the adoration of an ideal come true or
the wild happiness and tenderness that were sweeping through him
like a flame.  Scarlett was used to men asking her to marry them,
men much more attractive than Charles Hamilton, and men who had
more finesse than to propose at a barbecue when she had more
important matters on her mind.  She only saw a boy of twenty, red
as a beet and looking very silly.  She wished that she could tell
him how silly he looked.  But automatically, the words Ellen had
taught her to say in such emergencies rose to her lips and casting
down her eyes, from force of long habit, she murmured:  "Mr.
Hamilton, I am not unaware of the honor you have bestowed on me in
wanting me to become your wife, but this is all so sudden that I
do not know what to say."

That was a neat way of smoothing a man's vanity and yet keeping
him on the string, and Charles rose to it as though such bait were
new and he the first to swallow it.

"I would wait forever!  I wouldn't want you unless you were quite
sure.  Please, Miss O'Hara, tell me that I may hope!"

"Um," said Scarlett, her sharp eyes noting that Ashley, who had
not risen to take part in the war talk, was smiling up at Melanie.
If this fool who was grappling for her hand would only keep quiet
for a moment, perhaps she could hear what they were saying.  She
must hear what they said.  What did Melanie say to him that
brought that look of interest to his eyes?

Charles' words blurred the voices she strained to hear.

"Oh, hush!" she hissed at him, pinching his hand and not even
looking at him.

Startled, at first abashed, Charles blushed at the rebuff and
then, seeing how her eyes were fastened on his sister, he smiled.
Scarlett was afraid someone might hear his words.  She was
naturally embarrassed and shy, and in agony lest they be
overheard.  Charles felt a surge of masculinity such as he had
never experienced, for this was the first time in his life that he
had ever embarrassed any girl.  The thrill was intoxicating.  He
arranged his face in what he fancied was an expression of careless
unconcern and cautiously returned Scarlett's pinch to show that he
was man of the world enough to understand and accept her reproof.

She did not even feel his pinch, for she could hear clearly the
sweet voice that was Melanie's chief charm:  "I fear I cannot
agree with you about Mr. Thackeray's works.  He is a cynic.  I
fear he is not the gentleman Mr. Dickens is."

What a silly thing to say to a man, thought Scarlett, ready to
giggle with relief.  Why, she's no more than a bluestocking and
everyone knows what men think of bluestockings. . . .  The way to
get a man interested and to hold his interest was to talk about
him, and then gradually lead the conversation around to yourself--
and keep it there.  Scarlett would have felt some cause for alarm
if Melanie had been saying:  "How wonderful you are!" or "How do
you ever think of such things?  My little ole brain would bust if
I even tried to think about them!"  But here she was, with a man
at her feet, talking as seriously as if she were in church.  The
prospect looked brighter to Scarlett, so bright in fact that she
turned beaming eyes on Charles and smiled from pure joy.
Enraptured at this evidence of her affection, he grabbed up her
fan and plied it so enthusiastically her hair began to blow about
untidily.

"Ashley, you have not favored us with your opinion," said Jim
Tarleton, turning from the group of shouting men, and with an
apology Ashley excused himself and rose.  There was no one there
so handsome, thought Scarlett, as she marked how graceful was his
negligent pose and how the sun gleamed on his gold hair and
mustache.  Even the older men stopped to listen to his words.

"Why, gentlemen, if Georgia fights, I'll go with her.  Why else
would I have joined the Troop?" he said.  His gray eyes opened
wide and their drowsiness disappeared in an intensity that
Scarlett had never seen before.  "But, like Father, I hope the
Yankees will let us go in peace and that there will be no
fighting--"  He held up his hand with a smile, as a babel of
voices from the Fontaine and Tarleton boys began.  "Yes, yes, I
know we've been insulted and lied to--but if we'd been in the
Yankees' shoes and they were trying to leave the Union, how would
we have acted?  Pretty much the same.  We wouldn't have liked it."

"There he goes again," thought Scarlett.  "Always putting himself
in the other fellow's shoes."  To her, there was never but one
fair side to an argument.  Sometimes, there was no understanding
Ashley.

"Let's don't be too hot headed and let's don't have any war.  Most
of the misery of the world has been caused by wars.  And when the
wars were over, no one ever knew what they were all about."

Scarlett sniffed.  Lucky for Ashley that he had an unassailable
reputation for courage, or else there'd be trouble.  As she
thought this, the clamor of dissenting voices rose up about
Ashley, indignant, fiery.

Under the arbor, the deaf old gentleman from Fayetteville punched
India.

"What's it all about?  What are they saying?"

"War!" shouted India, cupping her hand to his ear.  "They want to
fight the Yankees!"

"War, is it?" he cried, fumbling about him for his cane and
heaving himself out of his chair with more energy than he had
shown in years.  "I'll tell 'um about war.  I've been there."  It
was not often that Mr. McRae had the opportunity to talk about
war, the way his women folks shushed him.

He stumped rapidly to the group, waving his cane and shouting and,
because he could not hear the voices about him, he soon had
undisputed possession of the field.

"You fire-eating young bucks, listen to me.  You don't want to
fight.  I fought and I know.  Went out in the Seminole War and was
a big enough fool to go to the Mexican War, too.  You all don't
know what war is.  You think it's riding a pretty horse and having
the girls throw flowers at you and coming home a hero.  Well, it
ain't.  No, sir!  It's going hungry, and getting the measles and
pneumonia from sleeping in the wet.  And if it ain't measles and
pneumonia, it's your bowels.  Yes sir, what war does to a man's
bowels--dysentery and things like that--"

The ladies were pink with blushes.  Mr. McRae was a reminder of a
cruder era, like Grandma Fontaine and her embarrassingly loud
belches, an era everyone would like to forget.

"Run get your grandpa," hissed one of the old gentleman's
daughters to a young girl standing near by.  "I declare," she
whispered to the fluttering matrons about her, "he gets worse
every day.  Would you believe it, this very morning he said to
Mary--and she's only sixteen:  'Now, Missy . . .'"  And the voice
went off into a whisper as the granddaughter slipped out to try to
induce Mr. McRae to return to his seat in the shade.

Of all the group that milled about under the trees, girls smiling
excitedly, men talking impassionedly, there was only one who
seemed calm.  Scarlett's eyes turned to Rhett Butler, who leaned
against a tree, his hands shoved deep in his trouser pockets.  He
stood alone, since Mr. Wilkes had left his side, and had uttered
no word as the conversation grew hotter.  The red lips under the
close-clipped black mustache curled down and there was a glint of
amused contempt in his black eyes--contempt, as if he listened to
the braggings of children.  A very disagreeable smile, Scarlett
thought.  He listened quietly until Stuart Tarleton, his red hair
tousled and his eyes gleaming, repeated:  "Why, we could lick them
in a month!  Gentlemen always fight better than rabble.  A month--
why, one battle--"

"Gentlemen," said Rhett Butler, in a flat drawl that bespoke his
Charleston birth, not moving from his position against the tree or
taking his hands from his pockets, "may I say a word?"

There was contempt in his manner as in his eyes, contempt overlaid
with an air of courtesy that somehow burlesqued their own manners.

The group turned toward him and accorded him the politeness always
due an outsider.

"Has any one of you gentlemen ever thought that there's not a
cannon factory south of the Mason-Dixon Line?  Or how few iron
foundries there are in the South?  Or woolen mills or cotton
factories or tanneries?  Have you thought that we would not have a
single warship and that the Yankee fleet could bottle up our
harbors in a week, so that we could not sell our cotton abroad?
But--of course--you gentlemen have thought of these things."

"Why, he means the boys are a passel of fools!" thought Scarlett
indignantly, the hot blood coming to her cheeks.

Evidently, she was not the only one to whom this idea occurred,
for several of the boys were beginning to stick out their chins.
John Wilkes casually but swiftly came back to his place beside the
speaker, as if to impress on all present that this man was his
guest and that, moreover, there were ladies present.

"The trouble with most of us Southerners," continued Rhett Butler,
"is that we either don't travel enough or we don't profit enough
by our travels.  Now, of course, all you gentlemen are well
traveled.  But what have you seen?  Europe and New York and
Philadelphia and, of course, the ladies have been to Saratoga" (he
bowed slightly to the group under the arbor).  "You've seen the
hotels and the museums and the balls and the gambling houses.  And
you've come home believing that there's no place like the South.
As for me, I was Charleston born, but I have spent the last few
years in the North."  His white teeth showed in a grin, as though
he realized that everyone present knew just why he no longer lived
in Charleston, and cared not at all if they did know.  "I have
seen many things that you all have not seen.  The thousands of
immigrants who'd be glad to fight for the Yankees for food and a
few dollars, the factories, the foundries, the shipyards, the iron
and coal mines--all the things we haven't got.  Why, all we have
is cotton and slaves and arrogance.  They'd lick us in a month."

For a tense moment, there was silence.  Rhett Butler removed a
fine linen handkerchief from his coat pocket and idly flicked dust
from his sleeve.  Then an ominous murmuring arose in the crowd and
from under the arbor came a humming as unmistakable as that of a
hive of newly disturbed bees.  Even while she felt the hot blood
of wrath still in her cheeks, something in Scarlett's practical
mind prompted the thought that what this man said was right, and
it sounded like common sense.  Why, she'd never even seen a
factory, or known anyone who had seen a factory.  But, even if it
were true, he was no gentleman to make such a statement--and at a
party, too, where everyone was having a good time.

Stuart Tarleton, brows lowering, came forward with Brent close at
his heels.  Of course, the Tarleton twins had nice manners and
they wouldn't make a scene at a barbecue, even though tremendously
provoked.  Just the same, all the ladies felt pleasantly excited,
for it was so seldom that they actually saw a scene or a quarrel.
Usually they had to hear of it third-hand.

"Sir," said Stuart heavily, "what do you mean?"

Rhett looked at him with polite but mocking eyes.

"I mean," he answered, "what Napoleon--perhaps you've heard of
him?--remarked once, 'God is on the side of the strongest
battalion!'" and, turning to John Wilkes, he said with courtesy
that was unfeigned:  "You promised to show me your library, sir.
Would it be too great a favor to ask to see it now?  I fear I must
go back to Jonesboro early this afternoon where a bit of business
calls me."

He swung about, facing the crowd, clicked his heels together and
bowed like a dancing master, a bow that was graceful for so
powerful a man, and as full of impertinence as a slap in the face.
Then he walked across the lawn with John Wilkes, his black head in
the air, and the sound of his discomforting laughter floated back
to the group about the tables.

There was a startled silence and then the buzzing broke out again.
India rose tiredly from her seat beneath the arbor and went toward
the angry Stuart Tarleton.  Scarlett could not hear what she said,
but the look in her eyes as she gazed up into his lowering face
gave Scarlett something like a twinge of conscience.  It was the
same look of belonging that Melanie wore when she looked at
Ashley, only Stuart did not see it.  So India did love him.
Scarlett thought for an instant that if she had not flirted so
blatantly with Stuart at that political speaking a year ago, he
might have married India long ere this.  But then the twinge
passed with the comforting thought that it wasn't her fault if
other girls couldn't keep their men.

Finally Stuart smiled down at India, an unwilling smile, and
nodded his head.  Probably India had been pleading with him not to
follow Mr. Butler and make trouble.  A polite tumult broke out
under the trees as the guests arose, shaking crumbs from laps.
The married women called to nurses and small children and gathered
their broods together to take their departure, and groups of girls
started off, laughing and talking, toward the house to exchange
gossip in the upstairs bedrooms and to take their naps.

All the ladies except Mrs. Tarleton moved out of the back yard,
leaving the shade of oaks and arbor to the men.  She was detained
by Gerald, Mr. Calvert and the others who wanted an answer from
her about the horses for the Troop.

Ashley strolled over to where Scarlett and Charles sat, a
thoughtful and amused smile on his face.

"Arrogant devil, isn't he?" he observed, looking after Butler.
"He looks like one of the Borgias."

Scarlett thought quickly but could remember no family in the
County or Atlanta or Savannah by that name.

"I don't know them.  Is he kin to them?  Who are they?"

An odd look came over Charles' face, incredulity and shame
struggling with love.  Love triumphed as he realized that it was
enough for a girl to be sweet and gentle and beautiful, without
having an education to hamper her charms, and he made swift
answer:  "The Borgias were Italians."

"Oh," said Scarlett, losing interest, "foreigners."

She turned her prettiest smile on Ashley, but for some reason he
was not looking at her.  He was looking at Charles, and there was
understanding in his face and a little pity.



Scarlett stood on the landing and peered cautiously over the
banisters into the hall below.  It was empty.  From the bedrooms
on the floor above came an unending hum of low voices, rising and
falling, punctuated with squeaks of laughter and, "Now, you
didn't, really!" and "What did he say then?"  On the beds and
couches of the six great bedrooms, the girls were resting, their
dresses off, their stays loosed, their hair flowing down their
backs.  Afternoon naps were a custom of the country and never were
they so necessary as on the all-day parties, beginning early in
the morning and culminating in a ball.  For half an hour, the
girls would chatter and laugh, and then servants would pull the
shutters and in the warm half-gloom the talk would die to whispers
and finally expire in silence broken only by soft regular
breathing.

Scarlett had made certain that Melanie was lying down on the bed
with Honey and Hetty Tarleton before she slipped into the hall and
started down the stairs.  From the window on the landing, she
could see the group of men sitting under the arbor, drinking from
tall glasses, and she knew they would remain there until late
afternoon.  Her eyes searched the group but Ashley was not among
them.  Then she listened and she heard his voice.  As she had
hoped, he was still in the front driveway bidding good-by to
departing matrons and children.

Her heart in her throat, she went swiftly down the stairs.  What
if she should meet Mr. Wilkes?  What excuse could she give for
prowling about the house when all the other girls were getting
their beauty naps?  Well, that had to be risked.

As she reached the bottom step, she heard the servants moving
about in the dining room under the butler's orders, lifting out
the table and chairs in preparation for the dancing.  Across the
wide hall was the open door of the library and she sped into it
noiselessly.  She could wait there until Ashley finished his
adieux and then call to him when he came into the house.

The library was in semidarkness, for the blinds had been drawn
against the sun.  The dim room with towering walls completely
filled with dark books depressed her.  It was not the place which
she would have chosen for a tryst such as she hoped this one would
be.  Large numbers of books always depressed her, as did people
who liked to read large numbers of books.  That is--all people
except Ashley.  The heavy furniture rose up at her in the half-
light, high-backed chairs with deep seats and wide arms, made for
the tall Wilkes men, squatty soft chairs of velvet with velvet
hassocks before them for the girls.  Far across the long room
before the hearth, the seven-foot sofa, Ashley's favorite seat,
reared its high back, like some huge sleeping animal.

She closed the door except for a crack and tried to make her heart
beat more slowly.  She tried to remember just exactly what she had
planned last night to say to Ashley, but she couldn't recall
anything.  Had she thought up something and forgotten it--or had
she only planned that Ashley should say something to her?  She
couldn't remember, and a sudden cold fright fell upon her.  If her
heart would only stop pounding in her ears, perhaps she could
think of what to say.  But the quick thudding only increased as
she heard him call a final farewell and walk into the front hall.

All she could think of was that she loved him--everything about
him, from the proud lift of his gold head to his slender dark
boots, loved his laughter even when it mystified her, loved his
bewildering silences.  Oh, if only he would walk in on her now and
take her in his arms, so she would be spared the need of saying
anything.  He must love her--"Perhaps if I prayed--"  She squeezed
her eyes tightly and began gabbling to herself "Hail Mary, full of
grace--"

"Why, Scarlett!" said Ashley's voice, breaking in through the
roaring in her ears and throwing her into utter confusion.  He
stood in the hall peering at her through the partly opened door,
a quizzical smile on his face.

"Who are you hiding from--Charles or the Tarletons?"

She gulped.  So he had noticed how the men had swarmed about her!
How unutterably dear he was standing there with his eyes
twinkling, all unaware of her excitement.  She could not speak,
but she put out a hand and drew him into the room.  He entered,
puzzled but interested.  There was a tenseness about her, a glow
in her eyes that he had never seen before, and even in the dim
light he could see the rosy flush on her cheeks.  Automatically he
closed the door behind him and took her hand.

"What is it?" he said, almost in a whisper.

At the touch of his hand, she began to tremble.  It was going to
happen now, just as she had dreamed it.  A thousand incoherent
thoughts shot through her mind, and she could not catch a single
one to mold into a word.  She could only shake and look up into
his face.  Why didn't he speak?

"What is it?" he repeated.  "A secret to tell me?"

Suddenly she found her tongue and just as suddenly all the years
of Ellen's teachings fell away, and the forthright Irish blood of
Gerald spoke from his daughter's lips.

"Yes--a secret.  I love you."

For an instance there was a silence so acute it seemed that
neither of them even breathed.  Then the trembling fell away from
her, as happiness and pride surged through her.  Why hadn't she
done this before?  How much simpler than all the ladylike
maneuverings she had been taught.  And then her eyes sought his.

There was a look of consternation in them, of incredulity and
something more--what was it?  Yes, Gerald had looked that way the
day his pet hunter had broken his leg and he had had to shoot him.
Why did she have to think of that now?  Such a silly thought.  And
why did Ashley look so oddly and say nothing?  Then something like
a well-trained mask came down over his face and he smiled
gallantly.

"Isn't it enough that you've collected every other man's heart
here today?" he said, with the old, teasing, caressing note in his
voice.  "Do you want to make it unanimous?  Well, you've always
had my heart, you know.  You cut your teeth on it."

Something was wrong--all wrong!  This was not the way she had
planned it.  Through the mad tearing of ideas round and round in
her brain, one was beginning to take form.  Somehow--for some
reason--Ashley was acting as if he thought she was just flirting
with him.  But he knew differently.  She knew he did.

"Ashley--Ashley--tell me--you must--oh, don't tease me now!  Have
I your heart?  Oh, my dear, I lo--"

His hand went across her lips, swiftly.  The mask was gone.

"You must not say these things, Scarlett!  You mustn't.  You don't
mean them.  You'll hate yourself for saying them, and you'll hate
me for hearing them!"

She jerked her head away.  A hot swift current was running through
her.

"I couldn't ever hate you.  I tell you I love you and I know you
must care about me because--"  She stopped.  Never before had she
seen so much misery in anyone's face.  "Ashley, do you care--you
do, don't you?"

"Yes," he said dully.  "I care."

If he had said he loathed her, she could not have been more
frightened.  She plucked at his sleeve, speechless.

"Scarlett," he said, "can't we go away and forget that we have
ever said these things?"

"No," she whispered.  "I can't.  What do you mean?  Don't you want
to--to marry me?"

He replied, "I'm going to marry Melanie."

Somehow she found that she was sitting on the low velvet chair and
Ashley, on the hassock at her feet, was holding both her hands in
his, in a hard grip.  He was saying things--things that made no
sense.  Her mind was quite blank, quite empty of all the thoughts
that had surged through it only a moment before, and his words
made no more impression than rain on glass.  They fell on
unhearing ears, words that were swift and tender and full of pity,
like a father speaking to a hurt child.

The sound of Melanie's name caught in her consciousness and she
looked into his crystal-gray eyes.  She saw in them the old
remoteness that had always baffled her--and a look of self-hatred.

"Father is to announce the engagement tonight.  We are to be
married soon.  I should have told you, but I thought you knew.  I
thought everyone knew--had known for years.  I never dreamed that
you--  You've so many beaux.  I thought Stuart--"

Life and feeling and comprehension were beginning to flow back
into her.

"But you just said you cared for me."

His warm hands hurt hers.

"My dear, must you make me say things that will hurt you?"

Her silence pressed him on.

"How can I make you see these things, my dear.  You who are so
young and unthinking that you do not know what marriage means."

"I know I love you."

"Love isn't enough to make a successful marriage when two people
are as different as we are.  You would want all of a man,
Scarlett, his body, his heart, his soul, his thoughts.  And if you
did not have them, you would be miserable.  And I couldn't give
you all of me.  I couldn't give all of me to anyone.  And I would
not want all of your mind and your soul.  And you would be hurt,
and then you would come to hate me--how bitterly!  You would hate
the books I read and the music I loved, because they took me away
from you even for a moment.  And I--perhaps I--"

"Do you love her?"

"She is like me, part of my blood, and we understand each other.
Scarlett!  Scarlett!  Can't I make you see that a marriage can't
go on in any sort of peace unless the two people are alike?"

Some one else had said that:  "Like must marry like or there'll be
no happiness."  Who was it?  It seemed a million years since she
had heard that, but it still did not make sense.

"But you said you cared."

"I shouldn't have said it."

Somewhere in her brain, a slow fire rose and rage began to blot
out everything else.

"Well, having been cad enough to say it--"

His face went white.

"I was a cad to say it, as I'm going to marry Melanie.  I did you
a wrong and Melanie a greater one.  I should not have said it, for
I knew you wouldn't understand.  How could I help caring for you--
you who have all the passion for life that I have not?  You who
can love and hate with a violence impossible to me?  Why you are
as elemental as fire and wind and wild things and I--"

She thought of Melanie and saw suddenly her quiet brown eyes with
their far-off look, her placid little hands in their black lace
mitts, her gentle silences.  And then her rage broke, the same
rage that drove Gerald to murder and other Irish ancestors to
misdeeds that cost them their necks.  There was nothing in her now
of the well-bred Robillards who could bear with white silence
anything the world might cast.

"Why don't you say it, you coward!  You're afraid to marry me!
You'd rather live with that stupid little fool who can't open her
mouth except to say 'Yes' or 'No' and raise a passel of mealy-
mouthed brats just like her!  Why--"

"You must not say these things about Melanie!"

"'I mustn't' be damned to you! Who are you to tell me I mustn't?
You coward, you cad, you--  You made me believe you were going to
marry me--"

"Be fair," his voice pleaded.  "Did I ever--"

She did not want to be fair, although she knew what he said was
true.  He had never once crossed the borders of friendliness with
her and, when she thought of this fresh anger rose, the anger of
hurt pride and feminine vanity.  She had run after him and he
would have none of her.  He preferred a whey-faced little fool
like Melanie to her.  Oh, far better that she had followed Ellen
and Mammy's precepts and never, never revealed that she even liked
him--better anything than to be faced with this scorching shame!

She sprang to her feet, her hands clenched and he rose towering
over her, his face full of the mute misery of one forced to face
realities when realities are agonies.

"I shall hate you till I die, you cad--you lowdown--lowdown--"
What was the word she wanted?  She could not think of any word bad
enough.

"Scarlett--please--"

He put out his hand toward her and, as he did, she slapped him
across the face with all the strength she had.  The noise cracked
like a whip in the still room and suddenly her rage was gone, and
there was desolation in her heart.

The red mark of her hand showed plainly on his white tired face.
He said nothing but lifted her limp hand to his lips and kissed
it.  Then he was gone before she could speak again, closing the
door softly behind him.

She sat down again very suddenly, the reaction from her rage
making her knees feel weak.  He was gone and the memory of his
stricken face would haunt her till she died.

She heard the soft muffled sound of his footsteps dying away down
the long hall, and the complete enormity of her actions came over
her.  She had lost him forever.  Now he would hate her and every
time he looked at her he would remember how she threw herself at
him when he had given her no encouragement at all.

"I'm as bad as Honey Wilkes," she thought suddenly, and remembered
how everyone, and she more than anyone else, had laughed
contemptuously at Honey's forward conduct.  She saw Honey's
awkward wigglings and heard her silly titters as she hung onto
boys' arms, and the thought stung her to new rage, rage at
herself, at Ashley, at the world.  Because she hated herself, she
hated them all with the fury of the thwarted and humiliated love
of sixteen.  Only a little true tenderness had been mixed into her
love.  Mostly it had been compounded out of vanity and complacent
confidence in her own charms.  Now she had lost and, greater than
her sense of loss, was the fear that she had made a public
spectacle of herself.  Had she been as obvious as Honey?  Was
everyone laughing at her?  She began to shake at the thought.

Her hand dropped to a little table beside her, fingering a tiny
china rose-bowl on which two china cherubs smirked.  The room was
so still she almost screamed to break the silence.  She must do
something or go mad.  She picked up the bowl and hurled it
viciously across the room toward the fireplace.  It barely cleared
the tall back of the sofa and splintered with a little crash
against the marble mantelpiece.

"This," said a voice from the depths of the sofa, "is too much."

Nothing had ever startled or frightened her so much, and her mouth
went too dry for her to utter a sound.  She caught hold of the
back of the chair, her knees going weak under her, as Rhett Butler
rose from the sofa where he had been lying and made her a bow of
exaggerated politeness.

"It is bad enough to have an afternoon nap disturbed by such a
passage as I've been forced to hear, but why should my life be
endangered?"

He was real.  He wasn't a ghost.  But, saints preserve us, he had
heard everything!  She rallied her forces into a semblance of
dignity.

"Sir, you should have made known your presence."

"Indeed?"  His white teeth gleamed and his bold dark eyes laughed
at her.  "But you were the intruder.  I was forced to wait for Mr.
Kennedy, and feeling that I was perhaps persona non grata in the
back yard, I was thoughtful enough to remove my unwelcome presence
here where I thought I would be undisturbed.  But, alas!" he
shrugged and laughed softly.

Her temper was beginning to rise again at the thought that this
rude and impertinent man had heard everything--heard things she
now wished she had died before she ever uttered.

"Eavesdroppers--" she began furiously.

"Eavesdroppers often hear highly entertaining and instructive
things," he grinned.  "From a long experience in eavesdropping, I--"

"Sir," she said, "you are no gentleman!"

"An apt observation," he answered airily.  "And, you, Miss, are no
lady."  He seemed to find her very amusing, for he laughed softly
again.  "No one can remain a lady after saying and doing what I
have just overheard.  However, ladies have seldom held any charms
for me.  I know what they are thinking, but they never have the
courage or lack of breeding to say what they think.  And that, in
time, becomes a bore.  But you, my dear Miss O'Hara, are a girl of
rare spirit, very admirable spirit, and I take off my hat to you.
I fail to understand what charms the elegant Mr. Wilkes can hold
for a girl of your tempestuous nature.  He should thank God on
bended knee for a girl with your--how did he put it?--'passion for
living,' but being a poor-spirited wretch--"

"You aren't fit to wipe his boots!" she shouted in rage.

"And you were going to hate him all your life!"  He sank down on
the sofa and she heard him laughing.

If she could have killed him, she would have done it.  Instead,
she walked out of the room with such dignity as she could summon
and banged the heavy door behind her.



She went up the stairs so swiftly that when she reached the
landing, she thought she was going to faint.  She stopped,
clutching the banisters, her heart hammering so hard from anger,
insult and exertion that it seemed about to burst through her
basque.  She tried to draw deep breaths but Mammy's lacings were
too tight.  If she should faint and they should find her here on
the landing, what would they think?  Oh, they'd think everything.
Ashley and that vile Butler man and those nasty girls who were so
jealous!  For once in her life, she wished that she carried
smelling salts, like the other girls, but she had never even owned
a vinaigrette.  She had always been so proud of never feeling
giddy.  She simply could not let herself faint now!

Gradually the sickening feeling began to depart.  In a minute,
she'd feel all right and then she'd slip quietly into the little
dressing room adjoining India's room, unloose her stays and creep
in and lay herself on one of the beds beside the sleeping girls.
She tried to quiet her heart and fix her face into more composed
lines, for she knew she must look like a crazy woman.  If any of
the girls were awake, they'd know something was wrong.  And no one
must ever, ever know that anything had happened.

Through the wide bay window on the lawn she could see the men
still lounging in their chairs under the trees and in the shade of
the arbor.  How she envied them!  How wonderful to be a man and
never have to undergo miseries such as she had just passed
through.  As she stood watching them, hot eyed and dizzy, she
heard the rapid pounding of a horse's hooves on the front drive,
the scattering of gravel and the sound of an excited voice calling
a question to one of the negroes.  The gravel flew again and
across her vision a man on horseback galloped over the green lawn
toward the lazy group under the trees.

Some late-come guest, but why did he ride his horse across the
turf that was India's pride?  She could not recognize him, but as
he flung himself from the saddle and clutched John Wilkes' arm,
she could see that there was excitement in every line of him.  The
crowd swarmed about him, tall glasses and palmetto fans abandoned
on tables and on the ground.  In spite of the distance, she could
hear the hubbub of voices, questioning, calling, feel the fever-
pitch tenseness of the men.  Then above the confused sounds Stuart
Tarleton's voice rose, in an exultant shout "Yee-aay-ee!" as if he
were on the hunting field.  And she heard for the first time,
without knowing it, the Rebel yell.

As she watched, the four Tarletons followed by the Fontaine boys
broke from the group and began hurrying toward the stable, yelling
as they ran, "Jeems!  You, Jeems!  Saddle the horses!"

"Somebody's house must have caught fire," Scarlett thought.  But
fire or no fire, her job was to get herself back into the bedroom
before she was discovered.

Her heart was quieter now and she tiptoed up the steps into the
silent hall.  A heavy warm somnolence lay over the house, as if it
slept at ease like the girls, until night when it would burst into
its full beauty with music and candle flames.  Carefully, she
eased open the door of the dressing room and slipped in.  Her hand
was behind her, still holding the knob, when Honey Wilkes' voice,
low pitched, almost in a whisper, came to her through the crack of
the opposite door leading into the bedroom.

"I think Scarlett acted as fast as a girl could act today."

Scarlett felt her heart begin its mad racing again and she
clutched her hand against it unconsciously, as if she would
squeeze it into submission.  "Eavesdroppers often hear highly
instructive things," jibed a memory.  Should she slip out again?
Or make herself known and embarrass Honey as she deserved?  But
the next voice made her pause.  A team of mules could not have
dragged her away when she heard Melanie's voice.

"Oh, Honey, no!  Don't be unkind.  She's just high spirited and
vivacious.  I thought her most charming."

"Oh," thought Scarlett, clawing her nails into her basque.  "To
have that mealymouthed little mess take up for me!"

It was harder to bear than Honey's out-and-out cattiness.
Scarlett had never trusted any woman and had never credited any
woman except her mother with motives other than selfish ones.
Melanie knew she had Ashley securely, so she could well afford to
show such a Christian spirit.  Scarlett felt it was just Melanie's
way of parading her conquest and getting credit for being sweet at
the same time.  Scarlett had frequently used the same trick
herself when discussing other girls with men, and it had never
failed to convince foolish males of her sweetness and
unselfishness.

"Well, Miss," said Honey tartly, her voice rising, "you must be
blind."

"Hush, Honey," hissed the voice of Sally Munroe.  "They'll hear
you all over the house!"

Honey lowered her voice but went on.

"Well, you saw how she was carrying on with every man she could
get hold of--even Mr. Kennedy and he's her own sister's beau.  I
never saw the like!  And she certainly was going after Charles."
Honey giggled self-consciously.  "And you know, Charles and I--"

"Are you really?" whispered voices excitedly.

"Well, don't tell anybody, girls--not yet!"

There were more gigglings and the bed springs creaked as someone
squeezed Honey.  Melanie murmured something about how happy she
was that Honey would be her sister.

"Well, I won't be happy to have Scarlett for my sister, because
she's a fast piece if ever I saw one," came the aggrieved voice of
Hefty Tarleton.  "But she's as good as engaged to Stuart.  Brent
says she doesn't give a rap about him, but, of course, Brent's
crazy about her, too."

"If you should ask me," said Honey with mysterious importance,
"there's only one person she does give a rap about.  And that's
Ashley!"

As the whisperings merged together violently, questioning,
interrupting, Scarlett felt herself go cold with fear and
humiliation.  Honey was a fool, a silly, a simpleton about men,
but she had a feminine instinct about other women that Scarlett
had underestimated.  The mortification and hurt pride that she had
suffered in the library with Ashley and with Rhett Butler were pin
pricks to this.  Men could be trusted to keep their mouths shut,
even men like Mr. Butler, but with Honey Wilkes giving tongue like
a hound in the field, the entire County would know about it before
six o'clock.  And Gerald had said only last night that he wouldn't
be having the County laughing at his daughter.  And how they would
all laugh now!  Clammy perspiration, starting under her armpits,
began to creep down her ribs.

Melanie's voice, measured and peaceful, a little reproving, rose
above the others.

"Honey, you know that isn't so.  And it's so unkind."

"It is too, Melly, and if you weren't always so busy looking for
the good in people that haven't got any good in them, you'd see
it.  And I'm glad it's so.  It serves her right.  All Scarlett
O'Hara has ever done has been to stir up trouble and try to get
other girls' beaux.  You know mighty well she took Stuart from
India and she didn't want him.  And today she tried to take Mr.
Kennedy and Ashley and Charles--"

"I must get home!" thought Scarlett.  "I must get home!"

If she could only be transferred by magic to Tara and to safety.
If she could only be with Ellen, just to see her, to hold onto her
skirt, to cry and pour out the whole story in her lap.  If she had
to listen to another word, she'd rush in and pull out Honey's
straggly pale hair in big handfuls and spit on Melanie Hamilton to
show her just what she thought of her charity.  But she'd already
acted common enough today, enough like white trash--that was where
all her trouble lay.

She pressed her hands hard against her skirts, so they would not
rustle and backed out as stealthily as an animal.  Home, she
thought, as she sped down the hall, past the closed doors and
still rooms, I must go home.

She was already on the front porch when a new thought brought her
up sharply--she couldn't go home!  She couldn't run away!  She
would have to see it through, bear all the malice of the girls and
her own humiliation and heartbreak.  To run away would only give
them more ammunition.

She pounded her clenched fist against the tall white pillar beside
her, and she wished that she were Samson, so that she could pull
down all of Twelve Oaks and destroy every person in it.  She'd
make them sorry.  She'd show them.  She didn't quite see how she'd
show them, but she'd do it all the same.  She'd hurt them worse
than they hurt her.

For the moment, Ashley as Ashley was forgotten.  He was not the
tall drowsy boy she loved but part and parcel of the Wilkeses,
Twelve Oaks, the County--and she hated them all because they
laughed.  Vanity was stronger than love at sixteen and there was
no room in her hot heart now for anything but hate.

"I won't go home," she thought.  "I'll stay here and I'll make
them sorry.  And I'll never tell Mother.  No, I'll never tell
anybody."  She braced herself to go back into the house, to
reclimb the stairs and go into another bedroom.

As she turned, she saw Charles coming into the house from the
other end of the long hall.  When he saw her, he hurried toward
her.  His hair was tousled and his face near geranium with
excitement.

"Do you know what's happened?" he cried, even before he reached
her.  "Have you heard?  Paul Wilson just rode over from Jonesboro
with the news!"

He paused, breathless, as he came up to her.  She said nothing and
only stared at him.

"Mr. Lincoln has called for men, soldiers--I mean volunteers--
seventy-five thousand of them!"

Mr. Lincoln again!  Didn't men ever think about anything that
really mattered?  Here was this fool expecting her to be excited
about Mr. Lincoln's didoes when her heart was broken and her
reputation as good as ruined.

Charles stared at her.  Her face was paper white and her narrow
eyes blazing like emeralds.  He had never seen such fire in any
girl's face, such a glow in anyone's eyes.

"I'm so clumsy," he said.  "I should have told you more gently.  I
forgot how delicate ladies are.  I'm sorry I've upset you so.  You
don't feel faint, do you?  Can I get you a glass of water?"

"No," she said, and managed a crooked smile.

"Shall we go sit on the bench?" he asked, taking her arm.

She nodded and he carefully handed her down the front steps and
led her across the grass to the iron bench beneath the largest oak
in the front yard.  How fragile and tender women are, he thought,
the mere mention of war and harshness makes them faint.  The idea
made him feel very masculine and he was doubly gentle as he seated
her.  She looked so strangely, and there was a wild beauty about
her white face that set his heart leaping.  Could it be that she
was distressed by the thought that he might go to the war?  No,
that was too conceited for belief.  But why did she look at him so
oddly?  And why did her hands shake as they fingered her lace
handkerchief.  And her thick sooty lashes--they were fluttering
just like the eyes of girls in romances he had read, fluttering
with timidity and love.

He cleared his throat three times to speak and failed each time.
He dropped his eyes because her own green ones met his so
piercingly, almost as if she were not seeing him.

"He has a lot of money," she was thinking swiftly, as a thought
and a plan went through her brain.  "And he hasn't any parents to
bother me and he lives in Atlanta.  And if I married him right
away, it would show Ashley that I didn't care a rap--that I was
only flirting with him.  And it would just kill Honey.  She'd
never, never catch another beau and everybody'd laugh fit to die
at her.  And it would hurt Melanie, because she loves Charles so
much.  And it would hurt Stu and Brent--"  She didn't quite know
why she wanted to hurt them, except that they had catty sisters.
"And they'd all be sorry when I came back here to visit in a fine
carriage and with lots of pretty clothes and a house of my own.
And they would never, never laugh at me."

"Of course, it will mean fighting," said Charles, after several
more embarrassed attempts.  "But don't you fret, Miss Scarlett,
it'll be over in a month and we'll have them howling.  Yes, sir!
Howling!  I wouldn't miss it for anything.  I'm afraid there won't
be much of a ball tonight, because the Troop is going to meet at
Jonesboro.  The Tarleton boys have gone to spread the news.  I
know the ladies will be sorry."

She said, "Oh," for want of anything better, but it sufficed.

Coolness was beginning to come back to her and her mind was
collecting itself.  A frost lay over all her emotions and she
thought that she would never feel anything warmly again.  Why not
take this pretty, flushed boy?  He was as good as anyone else and
she didn't care.  No, she could never care about anything again,
not if she lived to be ninety.

"I can't decide now whether to go with Mr. Wade Hampton's South
Carolina Legion or with the Atlanta Gate City Guard."

She said, "Oh," again and their eyes met and the fluttering lashes
were his undoing.

"Will you wait for me, Miss Scarlett?  It--it would be Heaven just
knowing that you were waiting for me until after we licked them!"
He hung breathless on her words, watching the way her lips curled
up at the corners, noting for the first time the shadows about
these corners and thinking what it would mean to kiss them.  Her
hand, with palm clammy with perspiration, slid into his.

"I wouldn't want to wait," she said and her eyes were veiled.

He sat clutching her hand, his mouth wide open.  Watching him from
under her lashes, Scarlett thought detachedly that he looked like
a gigged frog.  He stuttered several times, closed his mouth and
opened it again, and again became geranium colored.

"Can you possibly love me?"

She said nothing but looked down into her lap, and Charles was
thrown into new states of ecstasy and embarrassment.  Perhaps a
man should not ask a girl such a question.  Perhaps it would be
unmaidenly for her to answer it.  Having never possessed the
courage to get himself into such a situation before, Charles was
at a loss as to how to act.  He wanted to shout and to sing and to
kiss her and to caper about the lawn and then run tell everyone,
black and white, that she loved him.  But he only squeezed her
hand until he drove her rings into the flesh.

"You will marry me soon, Miss Scarlett?"

"Um," she said, fingering a fold of her dress.

"Shall we make it a double wedding with Mel--"

"No," she said quickly, her eyes glinting up at him ominously.
Charles knew again that he had made an error.  Of course, a girl
wanted her own wedding--not shared glory.  How kind she was to
overlook his blunderings.  If it were only dark and he had the
courage of shadows and could kiss her hand and say the things he
longed to say.

"When may I speak to your father?"

"The sooner the better," she said, hoping that perhaps he would
release the crushing pressure on her rings before she had to ask
him to do it.

He leaped up and for a moment she thought he was going to cut a
caper, before dignity claimed him.  He looked down at her
radiantly, his whole clean simple heart in his eyes.  She had
never had anyone look at her thus before and would never have it
from any other man, but in her queer detachment she only thought
that he looked like a calf.

"I'll go now and find your father," he said, smiling all over his
face.  "I can't wait.  Will you excuse me--dear?"  The endearment
came hard but having said it once, he repeated it again with
pleasure.

"Yes," she said.  "I'll wait here.  It's so cool and nice here."

He went off across the lawn and disappeared around the house, and
she was alone under the rustling oak.  From the stables, men were
streaming out on horseback, negro servants riding hard behind
their masters.  The Munroe boys tore past waving their hats, and
the Fontaines and Calverts went down the road yelling.  The four
Tarletons charged across the lawn by her and Brent shouted:
"Mother's going to give us the horses!  Yee-aay-ee!"  Turf flew
and they were gone, leaving her alone again.

The white house reared its tall columns before her, seeming to
withdraw with dignified aloofness from her.  It would never be her
house now.  Ashley would never carry her over the threshold as his
bride.  Oh, Ashley, Ashley!  What have I done?  Deep in her, under
layers of hurt pride and cold practicality, something stirred
hurtingly.  An adult emotion was being born, stronger than her
vanity or her willful selfishness.  She loved Ashley and she knew
she loved him and she had never cared so much as in that instant
when she saw Charles disappearing around the curved graveled walk.



CHAPTER VII


Within two weeks Scarlett had become a wife, and within two months
more she was a widow.  She was soon released from the bonds she
had assumed with so much haste and so little thought, but she was
never again to know the careless freedom of her unmarried days.
Widowhood had crowded closely on the heels of marriage but, to her
dismay, motherhood soon followed.

In after years when she thought of those last days of April, 1861,
Scarlett could never quite remember details.  Time and events were
telescoped, jumbled together like a nightmare that had no reality
or reason.  Till the day she died there would be blank spots in
her memories of those days.  Especially vague were her recollections
of the time between her acceptance of Charles and her wedding.  Two
weeks!  So short an engagement would have been impossible in times
of peace.  Then there would have been a decorous interval of a year
or at least six months.  But the South was aflame with war, events
roared along as swiftly as if carried by a mighty wind and the slow
tempo of the old days was gone.  Ellen had wrung her hands and
counseled delay, in order that Scarlett might think the matter over
at greater length.  But to her pleadings, Scarlett turned a sullen
face and a deaf ear.  Marry she would! and quickly too.  Within two
weeks.

Learning that Ashley's wedding had been moved up from the autumn
to the first of May, so he could leave with the Troop as soon as
it was called into service, Scarlett set the date of her wedding
for the day before his.  Ellen protested but Charles pleaded with
new-found eloquence, for he was impatient to be off to South
Carolina to join Wade Hampton's Legion, and Gerald sided with the
two young people.  He was excited by the war fever and pleased
that Scarlett had made so good a match, and who was he to stand in
the way of young love when there was a war?  Ellen, distracted,
finally gave in as other mothers throughout the South were doing.
Their leisured world had been turned topsy-turvy, and their
pleadings, prayers and advice availed nothing against the powerful
forces sweeping them along.

The South was intoxicated with enthusiasm and excitement.
Everyone knew that one battle would end the war and every young
man hastened to enlist before the war should end--hastened to
marry his sweetheart before he rushed off to Virginia to strike a
blow at the Yankees.  There were dozens of war weddings in the
County and there was little time for the sorrow of parting, for
everyone was too busy and excited for either solemn thoughts or
tears.  The ladies were making uniforms, knitting socks and
rolling bandages, and the men were drilling and shooting.  Train
loads of troops passed through Jonesboro daily on their way north
to Atlanta and Virginia.  Some detachments were gaily uniformed in
the scarlets and light blues and greens of select social-militia
companies; some small groups were in homespun and coonskin caps;
others, ununiformed, were in broadcloth and fine linen; all were
half-drilled, half-armed, wild with excitement and shouting as
though en route to a picnic.  The sight of these men threw the
County boys into a panic for fear the war would be over before
they could reach Virginia, and preparations for the Troop's
departure were speeded.

In the midst of this turmoil, preparations went forward for
Scarlett's wedding and, almost before she knew it, she was clad in
Ellen's wedding dress and veil, coming down the wide stairs of
Tara on her father's arm, to face a house packed full with guests.
Afterward she remembered, as from a dream, the hundreds of candles
flaring on the walls, her mother's face, loving, a little
bewildered, her lips moving in a silent prayer for her daughter's
happiness, Gerald flushed with brandy and pride that his daughter
was marrying both money, a fine name and an old one--and Ashley,
standing at the bottom of the steps with Melanie's arm through
his.

When she saw the look on his face, she thought:  "This can't be
real.  It can't be.  It's a nightmare.  I'll wake up and find it's
all been a nightmare.  I mustn't think of it now, or I'll begin
screaming in front of all these people.  I can't think now.  I'll
think later, when I can stand it--when I can't see his eyes."

It was all very dreamlike, the passage through the aisle of
smiling people, Charles' scarlet face and stammering voice and her
own replies, so startlingly clear, so cold.  And the congratulations
afterward and the kissing and the toasts and the dancing--all, all
like a dream.  Even the feel of Ashley's kiss upon her cheek, even
Melanie's soft whisper, "Now, we're really and truly sisters," were
unreal.  Even the excitement caused by the swooning spell that
overtook Charles' plump emotional aunt, Miss Pittypat Hamilton, had
the quality of a nightmare.

But when the dancing and toasting were finally ended and the dawn
was coming, when all the Atlanta guests who could be crowded into
Tara and the overseer's house had gone to sleep on beds, sofas and
pallets on the floor and all the neighbors had gone home to rest
in preparation for the wedding at Twelve Oaks the next day, then
the dreamlike trance shattered like crystal before reality.  The
reality was the blushing Charles, emerging from her dressing room
in his nightshirt, avoiding the startled look she gave him over
the high-pulled sheet.

Of course, she knew that married people occupied the same bed but
she had never given the matter a thought before.  It seemed very
natural in the case of her mother and father, but she had never
applied it to herself.  Now for the first time since the barbecue
she realized just what she had brought on herself.  The thought of
this strange boy whom she hadn't really wanted to marry getting
into bed with her, when her heart was breaking with an agony of
regret at her hasty action and the anguish of losing Ashley
forever, was too much to be borne.  As he hesitatingly approached
the bed she spoke in a hoarse whisper.

"I'll scream out loud if you come near me.  I will!  I will--at
the top of my voice!  Get away from me!  Don't you dare touch me!"

So Charles Hamilton spent his wedding night in an armchair in the
corner, not too unhappily, for he understood, or thought he
understood, the modesty and delicacy of his bride.  He was willing
to wait until her fears subsided, only--only--  He sighed as he
twisted about seeking a comfortable position, for he was going
away to the war so very soon.

Nightmarish as her own wedding had been, Ashley's wedding was even
worse.  Scarlett stood in her apple-green "second-day" dress in
the parlor of Twelve Oaks amid the blaze of hundreds of candles,
jostled by the same throng as the night before, and saw the plain
little face of Melanie Hamilton glow into beauty as she became
Melanie Wilkes.  Now, Ashley was gone forever.  Her Ashley.  No,
not her Ashley now.  Had he ever been hers?  It was all so mixed
up in her mind and her mind was so tired, so bewildered.  He had
said he loved her, but what was it that had separated them?  If
she could only remember.  She had stilled the County's gossiping
tongue by marrying Charles, but what did that matter now?  It had
seemed so important once, but now it didn't seem important at all.
All that mattered was Ashley.  Now he was gone and she was married
to a man she not only did not love but for whom she had an active
contempt.

Oh, how she regretted it all.  She had often heard of people
cutting off their noses to spite their faces but heretofore it had
been only a figure of speech.  Now she knew just what it meant.
And mingled with her frenzied desire to be free of Charles and
safely back at Tara, an unmarried girl again, ran the knowledge
that she had only herself to blame.  Ellen had tried to stop her
and she would not listen.

So she danced through the night of Ashley's wedding in a daze and
said things mechanically and smiled and irrelevantly wondered at
the stupidity of people who thought her a happy bride and could
not see that her heart was broken.  Well, thank God, they couldn't
see!

That night after Mammy had helped her undress and had departed and
Charles had emerged shyly from the dressing room, wondering if he
was to spend a second night in the horsehair chair, she burst into
tears.  She cried until Charles climbed into bed beside her and
tried to comfort her, cried without words until no more tears
would come and at last she lay sobbing quietly on his shoulder.

If there had not been a war, there would have been a week of
visiting about the County, with balls and barbecues in honor of
the two newly married couples before they set off to Saratoga or
White Sulphur for wedding trips.  If there had not been a war,
Scarlett would have had third-day and fourth-day and fifth-day
dresses to wear to the Fontaine and Calvert and Tarleton parties
in her honor.  But there were no parties now and no wedding trips.
A week after the wedding Charles left to join Colonel Wade
Hampton, and two weeks later Ashley and the Troop departed,
leaving the whole County bereft.

In those two weeks, Scarlett never saw Ashley alone, never had a
private word with him.  Not even at the terrible moment of
parting, when he stopped by Tara on his way to the train, did she
have a private talk.  Melanie, bonneted and shawled, sedate in
newly acquired matronly dignity, hung on his arm and the entire
personnel of Tara, black and white, turned out to see Ashley off
to the war.

Melanie said:  "You must kiss Scarlett, Ashley.  She's my sister
now," and Ashley bent and touched her cheek with cold lips, his
face drawn and taut.  Scarlett could hardly take any joy from that
kiss, so sullen was her heart at Melly's prompting it.  Melanie
smothered her with an embrace at parting.

"You will come to Atlanta and visit me and Aunt Pittypat, won't
you?  Oh, darling, we want to have you so much!  We want to know
Charlie's wife better."

Five weeks passed during which letters, shy, ecstatic, loving,
came from Charles in South Carolina telling of his love, his plans
for the future when the war was over, his desire to become a hero
for her sake and his worship of his commander, Wade Hampton.  In
the seventh week, there came a telegram from Colonel Hampton
himself, and then a letter, a kind, dignified letter of condolence.
Charles was dead.  The colonel would have wired earlier, but
Charles, thinking his illness a trifling one, did not wish to have
his family worried.  The unfortunate boy had not only been cheated
of the love he thought he had won but also of his high hopes of
honor and glory on the field of battle.  He had died ignominiously
and swiftly of pneumonia, following measles, without ever having
gotten any closer to the Yankees than the camp in South Carolina.

In due time, Charles' son was born and, because it was fashionable
to name boys after their fathers' commanding officers, he was
called Wade Hampton Hamilton.  Scarlett had wept with despair at
the knowledge that she was pregnant and wished that she were dead.
But she carried the child through its time with a minimum of
discomfort, bore him with little distress and recovered so quickly
that Mammy told her privately it was downright common--ladies
should suffer more.  She felt little affection for the child, hide
the fact though she might.  She had not wanted him and she
resented his coming and, now that he was here, it did not seem
possible that he was hers, a part of her.

Though she recovered physically from Wade's birth in a disgracefully
short time, mentally she was dazed and sick.  Her spirits drooped,
despite the efforts of the whole plantation to revive them.  Ellen
went about with a puckered, worried forehead and Gerald swore more
frequently than usual and brought her useless gifts from Jonesboro.
Even old Dr. Fontaine admitted that he was puzzled, after his tonic
of sulphur, molasses and herbs failed to perk her up.  He told Ellen
privately that it was a broken heart that made Scarlett so irritable
and listless by turns.  But Scarlett, had she wished to speak, could
have told them that it was a far different and more complex trouble.
She did not tell them that it was utter boredom, bewilderment at
actually being a mother and, most of all, the absence of Ashley that
made her look so woebegone.

Her boredom was acute and ever present.  The County had been
devoid of any entertainment or social life ever since the Troop
had gone away to war.  All of the interesting young men were gone--
the four Tarletons, the two Calverts, the Fontaines, the Munroes
and everyone from Jonesboro, Fayetteville and Lovejoy who was
young and attractive.  Only the older men, the cripples and the
women were left, and they spent their time knitting and sewing,
growing more cotton and corn, raising more hogs and sheep and cows
for the army.  There was never a sight of a real man except when
the commissary troop under Suellen's middle-aged beau, Frank
Kennedy, rode by every month to collect supplies.  The men in the
commissary were not very exciting, and the sight of Frank's timid
courting annoyed her until she found it difficult to be polite to
him.  If he and Suellen would only get it over with!

Even if the commissary troop had been more interesting, it would
not have helped her situation any.  She was a widow and her heart
was in the grave.  At least, everyone thought it was in the grave
and expected her to act accordingly.  This irritated her for, try
as she would, she could recall nothing about Charles except the
dying-calf look on his face when she told him she would marry him.
And even that picture was fading.  But she was a widow and she had
to watch her behavior.  Not for her the pleasures of unmarried
girls.  She had to be grave and aloof.  Ellen had stressed this at
great length after catching Frank's lieutenant swinging Scarlett
in the garden swing and making her squeal with laughter.  Deeply
distressed, Ellen had told her how easily a widow might get
herself talked about.  The conduct of a widow must be twice as
circumspect as that of a matron.

"And God only knows," thought Scarlett, listening obediently to
her mother's soft voice, "matrons never have any fun at all.  So
widows might as well be dead."

A widow had to wear hideous black dresses without even a touch of
braid to enliven them, no flower or ribbon or lace or even
jewelry, except onyx mourning brooches or necklaces made from the
deceased's hair.  And the black crepe veil on her bonnet had to
reach to her knees, and only after three years of widowhood could
it be shortened to shoulder length.  Widows could never chatter
vivaciously or laugh aloud.  Even when they smiled, it must be a
sad, tragic smile.  And, most dreadful of all, they could in no
way indicate an interest in the company of gentlemen.  And should
a gentleman be so ill bred as to indicate an interest in her, she
must freeze him with a dignified but well-chosen reference to her
dead husband.  Oh, yes, thought Scarlett, drearily, some widows do
remarry eventually, when they are old and stringy.  Though Heaven
knows how they manage it, with their neighbors watching.  And then
it's generally to some desperate old widower with a large
plantation and a dozen children.

Marriage was bad enough, but to be widowed--oh, then life was over
forever!  How stupid people were when they talked about what a
comfort little Wade Hampton must be to her, now that Charles was
gone.  How stupid of them to say that now she had something to
live for!  Everyone talked about how sweet it was that she had
this posthumous token of her love and she naturally did not
disabuse their minds.  But that thought was farthest from her
mind.  She had very little interest in Wade and sometimes it was
difficult to remember that he was actually hers.

Every morning she woke up and for a drowsy moment she was Scarlett
O'Hara again and the sun was bright in the magnolia outside her
window and the mockers were singing and the sweet smell of frying
bacon was stealing to her nostrils.  She was carefree and young
again.  Then she heard the fretful hungry wail and always--always
there was a startled moment when she thought:  "Why, there's a
baby in the house!"  Then she remembered that it was her baby.  It
was all very bewildering.

And Ashley!  Oh, most of all Ashley!  For the first time in her
life, she hated Tara, hated the long red road that led down the
hill to the river, hated the red fields with springing green
cotton.  Every foot of ground, every tree and brook, every lane
and bridle path reminded her of him.  He belonged to another woman
and he had gone to the war, but his ghost still haunted the roads
in the twilight, still smiled at her from drowsy gray eyes in the
shadows of the porch.  She never heard the sound of hooves coming
up the river road from Twelve Oaks that for a sweet moment she did
not think--Ashley!

She hated Twelve Oaks now and once she had loved it.  She hated it
but she was drawn there, so she could hear John Wilkes and the
girls talk about him--hear them read his letters from Virginia.
They hurt her but she had to hear them.  She disliked the stiff-
necked India and the foolish prattling Honey and knew they
disliked her equally, but she could not stay away from them.  And
every time she came home from Twelve Oaks, she lay down on her bed
morosely and refused to get up for supper.

It was this refusal of food that worried Ellen and Mammy more than
anything else.  Mammy brought up tempting trays, insinuating that
now she was a widow she might eat as much as she pleased, but
Scarlett had no appetite.

When Dr. Fontaine told Ellen gravely that heartbreak frequently
led to a decline and women pined away into the grave, Ellen went
white, for that fear was what she had carried in her heart.

"Isn't there anything to be done, Doctor?"

"A change of scene will be the best thing in the world for her,"
said the doctor, only too anxious to be rid of an unsatisfactory
patient.

So Scarlett, unenthusiastic, went off with her child, first to
visit her O'Hara and Robillard relatives in Savannah and then to
Ellen's sisters, Pauline and Eulalie, in Charleston.  But she was
back at Tara a month before Ellen expected her, with no
explanation of her return.  They had been kind in Savannah, but
James and Andrew and their wives were old and content to sit
quietly and talk of a past in which Scarlett had no interest.  It
was the same with the Robillards, and Charleston was terrible,
Scarlett thought.

Aunt Pauline and her husband, a little old man, with a formal,
brittle courtesy and the absent air of one living in an older age,
lived on a plantation on the river, far more isolated than Tara.
Their nearest neighbor was twenty miles away by dark roads through
still jungles of cypress swamp and oak.  The live oaks with their
waving curtains of gray moss gave Scarlett the creeps and always
brought to her mind Gerald's stories of Irish ghosts roaming in
shimmering gray mists.  There was nothing to do but knit all day
and at night listen to Uncle Carey read aloud from the improving
works of Mr. Bulwer-Lytton.

Eulalie, hidden behind a high-walled garden in a great house on
the Battery in Charleston, was no more entertaining.  Scarlett,
accustomed to wide vistas of rolling red hills, felt that she was
in prison.  There was more social life here than at Aunt
Pauline's, but Scarlett did not like the people who called, with
their airs and their traditions and their emphasis on family.  She
knew very well they all thought she was a child of a mesalliance
and wondered how a Robillard ever married a newly come Irishman.
Scarlett felt that Aunt Eulalie apologized for her behind her
back.  This aroused her temper, for she cared no more about family
than her father.  She was proud of Gerald and what he had
accomplished unaided except by his shrewd Irish brain.

And the Charlestonians took so much upon themselves about Fort
Sumter!  Good Heavens, didn't they realize that if they hadn't
been silly enough to fire the shot that started the war some other
fools would have done it?  Accustomed to the brisk voices of
upland Georgia, the drawling flat voices of the low country seemed
affected to her.  She thought if she ever again heard voices that
said "paams" for "palms" and "hoose" for "house" and "woon't" for
"won't" and "Maa and Paa" for "Ma and Pa," she would scream.  It
irritated her so much that during one formal call she aped
Gerald's brogue to her aunt's distress.  Then she went back to
Tara.  Better to be tormented with memories of Ashley than
Charleston accents.

Ellen, busy night and day, doubling the productiveness of Tara to
aid the Confederacy, was terrified when her eldest daughter came
home from Charleston thin, white and sharp tongued.  She had known
heartbreak herself, and night after night she lay beside the
snoring Gerald, trying to think of some way to lessen Scarlett's
distress.  Charles' aunt, Miss Pittypat Hamilton, had written her
several times, urging her to permit Scarlett to come to Atlanta
for a long visit, and now for the first time Ellen considered it
seriously.

She and Melanie were alone in a big house "and without male
protection," wrote Miss Pittypat, "now that dear Charlie has gone.
Of course, there is my brother Henry but he does not make his home
with us.  But perhaps Scarlett has told you of Henry.  Delicacy
forbids my putting more concerning him on paper.  Melly and I
would feel so much easier and safer if Scarlett were with us.
Three lonely women are better than two.  And perhaps dear Scarlett
could find some ease for her sorrow, as Melly is doing, by nursing
our brave boys in the hospitals here--and, of course, Melly and I
are longing to see the dear baby. . . ."

So Scarlett's trunk was packed again with her mourning clothes and
off she went to Atlanta with Wade Hampton and his nurse Prissy, a
headful of admonitions as to her conduct from Ellen and Mammy and
a hundred dollars in Confederate bills from Gerald.  She did not
especially want to go to Atlanta.  She thought Aunt Pitty the
silliest of old ladies and the very idea of living under the same
roof with Ashley's wife was abhorrent.  But the County with its
memories was impossible now, and any change was welcome.



