CHAPTER LVI


Rhett was gone for three months and during that time Scarlett had
no word from him.  She did not know where he was or how long he
would be gone.  Indeed, she had no idea if he would ever return.
During this time, she went about her business with her head high
and her heart sick.  She did not feel well physically but, forced
by Melanie, she went to the store every day and tried to keep up a
superficial interest in the mills.  But the store palled on her for
the first time and, although the business was treble what it had
been the year before and the money rolling in, she could take no
interest in it and was sharp and cross with the clerks.  Johnnie
Gallegher's mill was thriving and the lumber yard selling all his
supply easily, but nothing Johnnie did or said pleased her.
Johnnie, as Irish as she, finally erupted into rage at her naggings
and threatened to quit, after a long tirade which ended with "and
the back of both me hands to you, Ma'm, and the curse of Cromwell
on you."  She had to appease him with the most abject of apologies.

She never went to Ashley's mill.  Nor did she go to the lumber-yard
office when she thought he would be there.  She knew he was
avoiding her, knew that her constant presence in his house, at
Melanie's inescapable invitations, was a torment to him.  They
never spoke alone and she was desperate to question him.  She
wanted to know whether he now hated her and exactly what he had
told Melanie, but he held her at arm's length and silently pleaded
with her not to speak.  The sight of his face, old, haggard with
remorse, added to her load, and the fact that his mill lost money
every week was an extra irritant which she could not voice.

His helplessness in the face of the present situation irked her.
She did not know what he could do to better matters but she felt
that he should do something.  Rhett would have done something.
Rhett always did something, even if it was the wrong thing, and she
unwillingly respected him for it.

Now that her first rage at Rhett and his insults had passed, she
began to miss him and she missed him more and more as days went by
without news of him.  Out of the welter of rapture and anger and
heartbreak and hurt pride that he had left, depression emerged to
sit upon her shoulder like a carrion crow.  She missed him, missed
his light flippant touch in anecdotes that made her shout with
laughter, his sardonic grin that reduced troubles to their proper
proportions, missed even his jeers that stung her to angry retort.
Most of all she missed having him to tell things to.  Rhett was so
satisfactory in that respect.  She could recount shamelessly and
with pride how she had skinned people out of their eyeteeth and he
would applaud.  And if she even mentioned such things to other
people they were shocked.

She was lonely without him and Bonnie.  She missed the child more
than she had thought possible.  Remembering the last harsh words
Rhett had hurled at her about Wade and Ella, she tried to fill in
some of her empty hours with them.  But it was no use.  Rhett's
words and the children's reactions opened her eyes to a startling,
a galling truth.  During the babyhood of each child she had been
too busy, too worried with money matters, too sharp and easily
vexed, to win their confidence or affection.  And now, it was
either too late or she did not have the patience or the wisdom to
penetrate their small secretive hearts.

Ella!  It annoyed Scarlett to realize that Ella was a silly child
but she undoubtedly was.  She couldn't keep her little mind on one
subject any longer than a bird could stay on one twig and even when
Scarlett tried to tell her stories, Ella went off at childish
tangents, interrupting with questions about matters that had
nothing to do with the story and forgetting what she had asked long
before Scarlett could get the explanation out of her mouth.  And as
for Wade--perhaps Rhett was right.  Perhaps he was afraid of her.
That was odd and it hurt her.  Why should her own boy, her only
boy, be afraid of her?  When she tried to draw him out in talk, he
looked at her with Charles' soft brown eyes and squirmed and
twisted his feet in embarrassment.  But with Melanie, he bubbled
over with talk and brought from his pocket everything from fishing
worms to old strings to show her.

Melanie had a way with brats.  There was no getting around it.  Her
own little Beau was the best behaved and most lovable child in
Atlanta.  Scarlett got on better with him than she did with her own
son because little Beau had no self-consciousness where grown
people were concerned and climbed on her knee, uninvited, whenever
he saw her.  What a beautiful blond boy he was, just like Ashley!
Now if only Wade were like Beau--  Of course, the reason Melanie
could do so much with him was that she had only one child and she
hadn't had to worry and work as Scarlett had.  At least, Scarlett
tried to excuse herself that way but honesty forced her to admit
that Melanie loved children and would have welcomed a dozen.  And
the over-brimming affection she had was poured out on Wade and the
neighbors' broods.

Scarlett would never forget the shock of the day she drove by
Melanie's house to pick up Wade and heard, as she came up the front
walk, the sound of her son's voice raised in a very fair imitation
of the Rebel Yell--Wade who was always as still as a mouse at home.
And manfully seconding Wade's yell was the shrill piping of Beau.
When she had walked into the sitting room she had found the two
charging at the sofa with wooden swords.  They had hushed abashed
as she entered and Melanie had arisen, laughing and clutching at
hairpins and flying curls from where she was crouching behind the
sofa.

"It's Gettysburg," she explained.  "And I'm the Yankees and I've
gotten the worst of it.  This is General Lee," pointing to Beau,
"and this is General Pickett," putting an arm about Wade's
shoulder.

Yes, Melanie had a way with children that Scarlett could never
fathom.

"At least," she thought, "Bonnie loves me and likes to play with
me."  But honesty forced her to admit that Bonnie infinitely
preferred Rhett to her.  And perhaps she would never see Bonnie
again.  For all she knew, Rhett might be in Perisa or Egypt and
intending to stay there forever.

When Dr. Meade told her she was pregnant, she was astounded, for
she had been expecting a diagnosis of biliousness and over-wrought
nerves.  Then her mind fled back to that wild night and her face
went crimson at the memory.  So a child was coming from those
moments of high rapture--even if the memory of the rapture was
dimmed by what followed.  And for the first time she was glad that
she was going to have a child.  If it were only a boy!  A fine boy,
not a spiritless little creature like Wade.  How she would care for
him!  Now that she had the leisure to devote to a baby and the
money to smooth his path, how happy she would be!  She had an
impulse to write to Rhett in care of his mother in Charleston and
tell him.  Good Heavens, he must come home now!  Suppose he stayed
away till after the baby was born!  She could never explain that!
But if she wrote him he'd think she wanted him to come home and he
would be amused.  And he mustn't ever think she wanted him or
needed him.

She was very glad she had stifled this impulse when her first news
of Rhett came in a letter from Aunt Pauline in Charleston where, it
seemed, Rhett was visiting his mother.  What a relief to know he
was still in the United States, even if Aunt Pauline's letter was
infuriating.  Rhett had brought Bonnie to see her and Aunt Eulalie
and the letter was full of praise.

"Such a little beauty!  When she grows up she will certainly be a
belle.  But I suppose you know that any man who courts her will
have a tussle with Captain Butler, for I never saw such a devoted
father.  Now, my dear, I wish to confess something.  Until I met
Captain Butler, I felt that your marriage with him had been a
dreadful mesalliance for, of course, no one in Charleston hears
anything good about him and everyone is so sorry for his family.
In fact, Eulalie and I were uncertain as to whether or not we
should receive him--but, after all, the dear child is our great-
niece.  When he came, we were pleasantly surprised, most
pleasantly, and realized how un-Christian it is to credit idle
gossip.  For he is most charming.  Quite handsome, too, we thought,
and so very grave and courteous.  And so devoted to you and the
child.

"And now, my dear, I must write you of something that has come to
our ears--something Eulalie and I were loath to believe at first.
We had heard, of course, that you sometimes did help out at the
store that Mr. Kennedy had left you.  We had heard rumors but, of
course, we denied them.  We realized that in those first dreadful
days after the war, it was perhaps necessary, conditions being what
they were.  But there is no necessity now for such conduct on your
part, as I know Captain Butler is in quite comfortable circumstances
and is, moreover, fully capable of managing for you any business and
property you may own.  We had to know the truth of these rumors and
were forced to ask Captain Butler point-blank questions which was
most distressing to all of us.

"With reluctance he told us that you spent your mornings at the
store and would permit no one else to do the bookkeeping.  He also
admitted that you had some interest in a mill or mills (we did not
press him on this, being most upset at this information which was
news to us) that necessitated your riding about alone, or attended
by a ruffian who, Captain Butler assures us, is a murderer.  We
could see how this wrung his heart and think he must be a most
indulgent--in fact, a far too indulgent husband.  Scarlett, this
must stop.  Your mother is not here to command you and I must do it
in her place.  Think how your little children will feel when they
grow older and realize that you were in trade!  How mortified they
will be to know that you exposed yourself to the insults of rude
men and the dangers of careless gossip in attending to mills.  Such
unwomanly--"

Scarlett flung down the letter unfinished, with an oath.  She could
just see Aunt Pauline and Aunt Eulalie sitting in judgment on her
in the crumbling house on the Battery with little between them and
starvation except what she, Scarlett, sent them every month.
Unwomanly?  By God, if she hadn't been unwomanly Aunt Pauline and
Aunt Eulalie probably wouldn't have a roof over their heads this
very moment.  And damn Rhett for telling them about the store and
the bookkeeping and the mills!  Reluctant, was he?  She knew very
well the joy he took in palming himself off on the old ladies as
grave, courteous and charming, the devoted husband and father.
How he must have loved harrowing them with descriptions of her
activities with the store, the mills, the saloon.  What a devil he
was.  Why did such perverse things give him such pleasure?

But soon, even this rage passed into apathy.  So much of the keen
zest had gone out of life recently.  If only she could recapture
the thrill and the glow of Ashley--if only Rhett would come home
and make her laugh.



They were home again, without warning.  The first intimation of
their return was the sound of luggage being thumped on the front-
hall floor and Bonnie's voice crying, "Mother!"

Scarlett hurried from her room to the top of the stairs and saw her
daughter stretching her short plump legs in an effort to climb the
steps.  A resigned striped kitten was clutched to her breast.

"Gran'ma gave him to me," she cried excitedly, holding the kitten
out by the scruff.

Scarlett swept her up into her arms and kissed her, thankful that
the child's presence spared her her first meeting alone with Rhett.
Looking over Bonnie's head, she saw him in the hall below, paying
the cab driver.  He looked up, saw her and swept off his hat in a
wide gesture, bowing as he did.  When she met his dark eyes, her
heart leaped.  No matter what he was, no matter what he had done,
he was home and she was glad.

"Where's Mammy?" asked Bonnie, wriggling in Scarlett's grasp and
she reluctantly set the child on her feet.

It was going to be more difficult than she anticipated, greeting
Rhett with just the proper degree of casualness and, as for telling
him about the new baby!  She looked at his face as he came up the
steps, that dark nonchalant face, so impervious, so blank.  No,
she'd wait to tell him.  She couldn't tell him right away.  And
yet, such tidings as these belonged first to a husband, for a
husband was always happy to hear them.  But she did not think he
would be happy about it.

She stood on the landing, leaning against the banisters and
wondered if he would kiss her.  But he did not.  He said only:
"You are looking pale, Mrs. Butler.  Is there a rouge shortage?"

No word of missing her, even if he didn't mean it.  And he might
have at least kissed her in front of Mammy who, after bobbing a
curtsy, was leading Bonnie away down the hall to the nursery.  He
stood beside her on the landing, his eyes appraising her carelessly.

"Can this wanness mean that you've been missing me?" he questioned
and though his lips smiled, his eyes did not.

So that was going to be his attitude.  He was going to be as
hateful as ever.  Suddenly the child she was carrying became a
nauseating burden instead of something she had gladly carried, and
this man before her, standing carelessly with his wide Panama hat
upon his hip, her bitterest foe, the cause of all her troubles.
There was venom in her eyes as she answered, venom that was too
unmistakable to be missed, and the smile went from his face.

"If I'm pale it's your fault and not because I've missed you, you
conceited thing.  It's because--"  Oh, she hadn't intended to tell
him like this but the hot words rushed to her lips and she flung
them at him, careless of the servants who might hear.  "It's
because I'm going to have a baby!"

He sucked in his breath suddenly and his eyes went rapidly over
her.  He took a quick step toward her as though to put a hand on
her arm but she twisted away from him, and before the hate in her
eyes his face hardened.

"Indeed!" he said coolly.  "Well, who's the happy father?  Ashley?"

She clutched the newel post until the ears of the carved lion dug
with sudden pain into her palm.  Even she who knew him so well had
not anticipated this insult.  Of course, he was joking but there
were some jokes too monstrous to be borne.  She wanted to rake her
sharp nails across his eyes and blot out that queer light in them.

"Damn you!" she began, her voice shaking with sick rage.  "You--you
know it's yours.  And I don't want it any more than you do.  No--no
woman would want the children of a cad like you.  I wish--  Oh,
God, I wish it was anybody's baby but yours!"

She saw his swarthy face change suddenly, anger and something she
could not analyze making it twitch as though stung.

"There!" she thought in a hot rage of pleasure.  "There!  I've hurt
him now!"

But the old impassive mask was back across his face and he stroked
one side of his mustache.

"Cheer up," he said, turning from her and starting up the stairs,
"maybe you'll have a miscarriage."

For a dizzy moment she thought what childbearing meant, the nausea
that tore her, the tedious waiting, the thickening of her figure,
the hours of pain.  Things no man could ever realize.  And he dared
to joke.  She would claw him.  Nothing but the sight of blood upon
his dark face would ease this pain in her heart.  She lunged for
him, swift as a cat, but with a light startled movement, he
sidestepped, throwing up his arm to ward her off.  She was standing
on the edge of the freshly waxed top step, and as her arm with the
whole weight of her body behind it, struck his out-thrust arm, she
lost her balance.  She made a wild clutch for the newel post and
missed it.  She went down the stairs backwards, feeling a sickening
dart of pain in her ribs as she landed.  And, too dazed to catch
herself, she rolled over and over to the bottom of the flight.



It was the first time Scarlett had ever been ill, except when she
had her babies, and somehow those times did not count.  She had not
been forlorn and frightened then, as she was now, weak and pain
racked and bewildered.  She knew she was sicker than they dared
tell her, feebly realized that she might die.  The broken rib
stabbed when she breathed, her bruised face and head ached and her
whole body was given over to demons who plucked at her with hot
pinchers and sawed on her with dull knives and left her, for short
intervals, so drained of strength that she could not regain grip on
herself before they returned.  No, childbirth had not been like
this.  She had been able to eat hearty meals two hours after Wade
and Ella and Bonnie had been born, but now the thought of anything
but cool water brought on feeble nausea.

How easy it was to have a child and how painful not to have one!
Strange, what a pang it had been even in her pain, to know that she
would not have this child.  Stranger still that it should have been
the first child she really wanted.  She tried to think why she
wanted it but her mind was too tired.  Her mind was too tired to
think of anything except fear of death.  Death was in the room and
she had no strength to confront it, to fight it back and she was
frightened.  She wanted someone strong to stand by her and hold her
hand and fight off death until enough strength came back for her to
do her own fighting.

Rage had been swallowed up in pain and she wanted Rhett.  But he
was not there and she could not bring herself to ask for him.

Her last memory of him was how he looked as he picked her up in the
dark hall at the bottom of the steps, his face white and wiped
clean of all save hideous fear, his voice hoarsely calling for
Mammy.  And then there was a faint memory of being carried
upstairs, before darkness came over her mind.  And then pain and
more pain and the room full of buzzing voices and Aunt Pittypat's
sobs and Dr. Meade's brusque orders and feet that hurried on the
stairs and tiptoes in the upper hall.  And then like a blinding ray
of lightning, the knowledge of death and fear that suddenly made
her try to scream a name and the scream was only a whisper.

But that forlorn whisper brought instant response from somewhere in
the darkness beside the bed and the soft voice of the one she
called made answer in lullaby tones:  "I'm here, dear.  I've been
right here all the time."

Death and fear receded gently as Melanie took her hand and laid it
quietly against her cool cheek.  Scarlett tried to turn to see her
face and could not.  Melly was having a baby and the Yankees were
coming.  The town was afire and she must hurry, hurry.  But Melly
was having a baby and she couldn't hurry.  She must stay with her
till the baby came and be strong because Melly needed her strength.
Melly was hurting so bad--there were hot pinchers at her and dull
knives and recurrent waves of pain.  She must hold Melly's hand.

But Dr. Meade was there after all, he had come, even if the soldiers
at the depot did need him for she heard him say:  "Delirious.
Where's Captain Butler?"

The night was dark and then light and sometimes she was having a
baby and sometimes it was Melanie who cried out, but through it all
Melly was there and her hands were cool and she did not make futile
anxious gestures or sob like Aunt Pitty.  Whenever Scarlett opened
her eyes, she said "Melly?" and the voice answered.  And usually
she started to whisper:  "Rhett--I want Rhett" and remembered, as
from a dream, that Rhett didn't want her, that Rhett's face was
dark as an Indian's and his teeth were white in a jeer.  She wanted
him and he didn't want her.

Once she said "Melly?" and Mammy's voice said:  "S'me, chile," and
put a cold rag on her forehead and she cried fretfully:  "Melly--
Melanie" over and over but for a long time Melanie did not come.
For Melanie was sitting on the edge of Rhett's bed and Rhett, drunk
and sobbing, was sprawled on the floor, crying, his head in her
lap.

Every time she had come out of Scarlett's room she had seen him,
sitting on his bed, his door wide, watching the door across the
hall.  The room was untidy, littered with cigar butts and dishes of
untouched food.  The bed was tumbled and unmade and he sat on it,
unshaven and suddenly gaunt, endlessly smoking.  He never asked
questions when he saw her.  She always stood in the doorway for a
minute, giving the news:  "I'm sorry, she's worse," or "No, she
hasn't asked for you yet.  You see, she's delirious" or "You
mustn't give up hope, Captain Butler.  Let me fix you some hot
coffee and something to eat.  You'll make yourself ill."

Her heart always ached with pity for him, although she was almost
too tired and sleepy to feel anything.  How could people say such
mean things about him--say he was heartless and wicked and
unfaithful to Scarlett, when she could see him getting thin before
her eyes, see the torment in his face?  Tired as she was, she
always tried to be kinder than usual when she gave bulletins from
the sick room.  He looked so like a damned soul waiting judgment--
so like a child in a suddenly hostile world.  But everyone was like
a child to Melanie.

But when, at last, she went joyfully to his door to tell him that
Scarlett was better, she was unprepared for what she found.  There
was a half-empty bottle of whisky on the table by the bed and the
room reeked with the odor.  He looked at her with bright glazed
eyes and his jaw muscles trembled despite his efforts to set his
teeth.

"She's dead?"

"Oh, no.  She's much better."

He said:  "Oh, my God," and put his head in his hands.  She saw his
wide shoulders shake as with a nervous chill and, as she watched
him pityingly, her pity changed to horror for she saw that he was
crying.  Melanie had never seen a man cry and of all men, Rhett, so
suave, so mocking, so eternally sure of himself.

It frightened her, the desperate choking sound he made.  She had a
terrified thought that he was drunk and Melanie was afraid of
drunkenness.  But when he raised his head and she caught one
glimpse of his eyes, she stepped swiftly into the room, closed the
door softly behind her and went to him.  She had never seen a man
cry but she had comforted the tears of many children.  When she put
a soft hand on his shoulder, his arms went suddenly around her
skirts.  Before she knew how it happened she was sitting on the bed
and he was on the floor, his head in her lap and his arms and hands
clutching her in a frantic clasp that hurt her.

She stroked the black head gently and said:  "There! There!"
soothingly.  "There!  She's going to get well."

At her words, his grip tightened and he began speaking rapidly,
hoarsely, babbling as though to a grave which would never give up
its secrets, babbling the truth for the first time in his life,
baring himself mercilessly to Melanie who was at first, utterly
uncomprehending, utterly maternal.  He talked brokenly, burrowing
his head in her lap, tugging at the folds of her skirt.  Sometimes
his words were blurred, muffled, sometimes they came far too
clearly to her ears, harsh, bitter words of confession and
abasement, speaking of things she had never heard even a woman
mention, secret things that brought the hot blood of modesty to her
cheeks and made her grateful for his bowed head.

She patted his head as she did little Beau's and said:  "Hush!
Captain Butler!  You must not tell me these things!  You are not
yourself.  Hush!"  But his voice went on in a wild torrent of
outpouring and he held to her dress as though it were his hope of
life.

He accused himself of deeds she did not understand; he mumbled the
name of Belle Watling and then he shook her with his violence as he
cried:  "I've killed Scarlett, I've killed her.  You don't
understand.  She didn't want this baby and--"

"You must hush!  You are beside yourself!  Not want a baby?  Why
every woman wants--"

"No!  No!  You want babies.  But she doesn't.  Not my babies--"

"You must stop!"

"You don't understand.  She didn't want a baby and I made her.
This--this baby--it's all my damned fault.  We hadn't been sleeping
together--"

"Hush, Captain Butler!  It is not fit--"

"And I was drunk and insane and I wanted to hurt her--because she
had hurt me.  I wanted to--and I did--but she didn't want me.
She's never wanted me.  She never has and I tried--I tried so hard
and--"

"Oh, please!"

"And I didn't know about this baby till the other day--when she
fell.  She didn't know where I was to write to me and tell me--but
she wouldn't have written me if she had known.  I tell you--I tell
you I'd have come straight home--if I'd only known--whether she
wanted me home or not. . . ."

"Oh, yes, I know you would!"

"God, I've been crazy these weeks, crazy and drunk!  And when she
told me, there on the steps--what did I do?  What did I say?  I
laughed and said:  'Cheer up.  Maybe you'll have a miscarriage.'
And she--"

Melanie suddenly went white and her eyes widened with horror as she
looked down at the black tormented head writhing in her lap.  The
afternoon sun streamed in through the open window and suddenly she
saw, as for the first time, how large and brown and strong his
hands were and how thickly the black hairs grew along the backs of
them.  Involuntarily, she recoiled from them.  They seemed so
predatory, so ruthless and yet, twined in her skirt, so broken, so
helpless.

Could it be possible that he had heard and believed the preposterous
lie about Scarlett and Ashley and become jealous?  True, he had left
town immediately after the scandal broke but--  No, it couldn't be
that.  Captain Butler was always going off abruptly on journeys.  He
couldn't have believed the gossip.  He was too sensible.  If that
had been the cause of the trouble, wouldn't he have tried to shoot
Ashley?  Or at least demanded an explanation?

No, it couldn't be that.  It was only that he was drunk and sick
from strain and his mind was running wild, like a man delirious,
babbling wild fantasies.  Men couldn't stand strains as well as
women.  Something had upset him, perhaps he had had a small quarrel
with Scarlett and magnified it.  Perhaps some of the awful things
he said were true.  But all of them could not be true.  Oh, not
that last, certainly!  No man could say such a thing to a woman he
loved as passionately as this man loved Scarlett.  Melanie had never
seen evil, never seen cruelty, and now that she looked on them for
the first time she found them too inconceivable to believe.  He was
drunk and sick.  And sick children must be humored.

"There!  There!" she said crooningly.  "Hush, now.  I understand."

He raised his head violently and looked up at her with bloodshot
eyes, fiercely throwing off her hands.

"No, by God, you don't understand!  You can't understand!  You're--
you're too good to understand.  You don't believe me but it's all
true and I'm a dog.  Do you know why I did it?  I was mad, crazy
with jealousy.  She never cared for me and I thought I could make
her care.  But she never cared.  She doesn't love me.  She never
has.  She loves--"

His passionate, drunken gaze met hers and he stopped, mouth open,
as though for the first time he realized to whom he was speaking.
Her face was white and strained but her eyes were steady and sweet
and full of pity and unbelief.  There was a luminous serenity in
them and the innocence in the soft brown depths struck him like a
blow in the face, clearing some of the alcohol out of his brain,
halting his mad, careering words in mid-flight.  He trailed off
into a mumble, his eyes dropping away from hers, his lids batting
rapidly as he fought back to sanity.

"I'm a cad," he muttered, dropping his head tiredly back into her
lap.  "But not that big a cad.  And if I did tell you, you wouldn't
believe me, would you?  You're too good to believe me.  I never
before knew anybody who was really good.  You wouldn't believe me,
would you?"

"No, I wouldn't believe you," said Melanie soothingly, beginning to
stroke his hair again.  "She's going to get well.  There, Captain
Butler!  Don't cry!  She's going to get well."



CHAPTER LVII


It was a pale, thin woman that Rhett put on the Jonesboro train a
month later.  Wade and Ella, who were to make the trip with her,
were silent and uneasy at their mother's still, white face.  They
clung close to Prissy, for even to their childish minds there was
something frightening in the cold, impersonal atmosphere between
their mother and their stepfather.

Weak as she was, Scarlett was going home to Tara.  She felt that
she would stifle if she stayed in Atlanta another day, with her
tired mind forcing itself round and round the deeply worn circle of
futile thoughts about the mess she was in.  She was sick in body
and weary in mind and she was standing like a lost child in a
nightmare country in which there was no familiar landmark to guide
her.

As she had once fled Atlanta before an invading army, so she was
fleeing it again, pressing her worries into the back of her mind
with her old defense against the world:  "I won't think of it now.
I can't stand it if I do.  I'll think of it tomorrow at Tara.
Tomorrow's another day."  It seemed that if she could only get back
to the stillness and the green cotton fields of home, all her
troubles would fall away and she would somehow be able to mold her
shattered thoughts into something she could live by.

Rhett watched the train until it was out of sight and on his face
there was a look of speculative bitterness that was not pleasant.
He sighed, dismissed the carriage and mounting his horse, rode down
Ivy Street toward Melanie's house.

It was a warm morning and Melanie sat on the vine-shaded porch, her
mending basket piled high with socks.  Confusion and dismay filled
her when she saw Rhett alight from his horse and toss the reins
over the arm of the cast-iron negro boy who stood at the sidewalk.
She had not seen him alone since that too dreadful day when
Scarlett had been so ill and he had been so--well--so drunk.
Melanie hated even to think the word.  She had spoken to him only
casually during Scarlett's convalescence and, on those occasions,
she had found it difficult to meet his eyes.  However, he had been
his usual bland self at those times, and never by look or word
showed that such a scene had taken place between them.  Ashley had
told her once that men frequently did not remember things said and
done in drink and Melanie prayed heartily that Captain Butler's
memory had failed him on that occasion.  She felt she would rather
die than learn that he remembered his outpourings.  Timidity and
embarrassment swept over her and waves of color mounted her cheeks
as he came up the walk.  But perhaps he had only come to ask if
Beau could spend the day with Bonnie.  Surely he wouldn't have the
bad taste to come and thank her for what she had done that day!

She rose to meet him, noting with surprise, as always, how lightly
he walked for a big man.

"Scarlett has gone?"

"Yes.  Tara will do her good," he said smiling.  "Sometimes I think
she's like the giant Antaeus who became stronger each time he
touched Mother Earth.  It doesn't do for Scarlett to stay away too
long from the patch of red mud she loves.  The sight of cotton
growing will do her more good than all Dr. Meade's tonics."

"Won't you sit down?" said Melanie, her hands fluttering.  He was
so very large and male, and excessively male creatures always
discomposed her.  They seem to radiate a force and vitality that
made her feel smaller and weaker even than she was.  He looked so
swarthy and formidable and the heavy muscles in his shoulders
swelled against his white linen coat in a way that frightened her.
It seemed impossible that she had seen all this strength and
insolence brought low.  And she had held that black head in her
lap!

"Oh, dear!" she thought in distress and blushed again.

"Miss Melly," he said gently, "does my presence annoy you?  Would
you rather I went away?  Pray be frank."

"Oh!" she thought.  "He does remember!  And he knows how upset I
am!"

She looked up at him, imploringly, and suddenly her embarrassment
and confusion faded.  His eyes were so quiet, so kind, so
understanding that she wondered how she could ever have been silly
enough to be flurried.  His face looked tired and, she thought with
surprise, more than a little sad.  How could she have even thought
he'd be ill bred enough to bring up subjects both would rather
forget?

"Poor thing, he's been so worried about Scarlett," she thought, and
managing a smile, she said:  "Do sit down, Captain Butler."

He sat down heavily and watched her as she picked up her darning.

"Miss Melly, I've come to ask a very great favor of you and," he
smiled and his mouth twisted down, "to enlist your aid in a
deception from which I know you will shrink."

"A--deception?"

"Yes.  Really, I've come to talk business to you."

"Oh, dear.  Then it's Mr. Wilkes you'd better see.  I'm such a
goose about business.  I'm not smart like Scarlett."

"I'm afraid Scarlett is too smart for her own good," he said, "and
that is exactly what I want to talk to you about.  You know how--
ill she's been.  When she gets back from Tara she will start again
hammer and tongs with the store and those mills which I wish
devoutly would explode some night.  I fear for her health, Miss
Melly."

"Yes, she does far too much.  You must make her stop and take care
of herself."

He laughed.

"You know how headstrong she is.  I never even try to argue with
her.  She's just like a willful child.  She won't let me help her--
she won't let anyone help her.  I've tried to get her to sell her
share in the mills but she won't.  And now, Miss Melly, I come to
the business matter.  I know Scarlett would sell the remainder of
her interest in the mills to Mr. Wilkes but to no one else, and I
want Mr. Wilkes to buy her out."

"Oh, dear me!  That would be nice but--"  Melanie stopped and bit
her lip.  She could not mention money matters to an outsider.
Somehow, despite what he made from the mill, she and Ashley never
seemed to have enough money.  It worried her that they saved so
little.  She did not know where the money went.  Ashley gave her
enough to run the house on, but when it came to extra expenses they
were often pinched.  Of course, her doctor's bills were so much, and
then the books and furniture Ashley ordered from New York did run
into money.  And they had fed and clothed any number of waifs who
slept in their cellar.  And Ashley never felt like refusing a loan
to any man who'd been in the Confederate Army.  And--

"Miss Melly, I want to lend you the money," said Rhett.

"That's so kind of you, but we might never repay it."

"I don't want it repaid.  Don't be angry with me, Miss Melly!  Please
hear me through.  It will repay me enough to know that Scarlett will
not be exhausting herself driving miles to the mills every day.  The
store will be enough to keep her busy and happy. . . .  Don't you
see?"

"Well--yes--" said Melanie uncertainly.

"You want your boy to have a pony don't you?  And want him to go to
the university and to Harvard and to Europe on a Grand Tour?"

"Oh, of course," cried Melanie, her face lighting up, as always, at
the mention of Beau.  "I want him to have everything but--well,
everyone is so poor these days that--"

"Mr. Wilkes could make a pile of money out of the mills some day,"
said Rhett.  "And I'd like to see Beau have all the advantages he
deserves."

"Oh, Captain Butler, what a crafty wretch you are!" she cried,
smiling.  "Appealing to a mother's pride!  I can read you like a
book."

"I hope not," said Rhett, and for the first time there was a gleam
in his eye.  "Now will you let me lend you the money?"

"But where does the deception come in?"

"We must be conspirators and deceive both Scarlett and Mr. Wilkes."

"Oh, dear!  I couldn't!"

"If Scarlett knew I had plotted behind her back, even for her own
good--well, you know her temper!  And I'm afraid Mr. Wilkes would
refuse any loan I offered him.  So neither of them must know where
the money comes from."

"Oh, but I'm sure Mr. Wilkes wouldn't refuse, if he understood the
matter.  He is so fond of Scarlett."

"Yes, I'm sure he is," said Rhett smoothly.  "But just the same he
would refuse.  You know how proud all the Wilkes are."

"Oh, dear!" cried Melanie miserably, "I wish--  Really, Captain
Butler, I couldn't deceive my husband."

"Not even to help Scarlett?" Rhett looked very hurt.  "And she is
so fond of you!"

Tears trembled on Melanie's eyelids.

"You know I'd do anything in the world for her.  I can never, never
half repay her for what she's done for me.  You know."

"Yes," he said shortly, "I know what she's done for you.  Couldn't
you tell Mr. Wilkes that the money was left you in the will of some
relative?"

"Oh, Captain Butler, I haven't a relative with a penny to bless
him!"

"Then, if I sent the money through the mail to Mr. Wilkes without
his knowing who sent it, would you see that it was used to buy the
mills and not--well, given away to destitute ex-Confederates?"

At first she looked hurt at his last words, as though they implied
criticism of Ashley, but he smiled so understandingly she smiled
back.

"Of course I will."

"So it's settled?  It's to be our secret?"

"But I have never kept anything secret from my husband!"

"I'm sure of that, Miss Melly."

As she looked at him she thought how right she had always been
about him and how wrong so many other people were.  People had said
he was brutal and sneering and bad mannered and even dishonest.
Though many of the nicest people were now admitting they had been
wrong.  Well!  She had known from the very beginning that he was a
fine man.  She had never received from him anything but the kindest
treatment, thoughtfulness, utter respect and what understanding!
And then, how he loved Scarlett!  How sweet of him to take this
roundabout way of sparing Scarlett one of the loads she carried!

In an impulsive rush of feeling, she said:  "Scarlett's lucky to
have a husband who's so nice to her!"

"You think so?  I'm afraid she wouldn't agree with you, if she
could hear you.  Besides, I want to be nice to you too, Miss Melly.
I'm giving you more than I'm giving Scarlett."

"Me!" she questioned, puzzled.  "Oh, you mean for Beau."

He picked up his hat and rose.  He stood for a moment looking down
at the plain, heart-shaped face with its long widow's peak and
serious dark eyes.  Such an unworldly face, a face with no defenses
against life.

"No, not Beau.  I'm trying to give you something more than Beau, if
you can imagine that."

"No, I can't," she said, bewildered again.  "There's nothing in the
world more precious to me than Beau except Ash--except Mr. Wilkes."

Rhett said nothing and looked down at her, his dark face still.

"You're mighty nice to want to do things for me, Captain Butler,
but really, I'm so lucky.  I have everything in the world any woman
could want."

"That's fine," said Rhett, suddenly grim.  "And I intend to see
that you keep them."



When Scarlett came back from Tara, the unhealthy pallor had gone
from her face and her cheeks were rounded and faintly pink.  Her
green eyes were alert and sparkling again, and she laughed aloud
for the first time in weeks when Rhett and Bonnie met her and Wade
and Ella at the depot--laughed in annoyance and amusement.  Rhett
had two straggling turkey feathers in the brim of his hat and
Bonnie, dressed in a sadly torn dress that was her Sunday frock,
had diagonal lines of indigo blue on her cheeks and a peacock
feather half as long as she was in her curls.  Evidently a game of
Indian had been in progress when the time came to meet the train
and it was obvious from the look of quizzical helplessness on
Rhett's face and the lowering indignation of Mammy that Bonnie had
refused to have her toilet remedied, even to meet her mother.

Scarlett said:  "What a ragamuffin!" as she kissed the child and
turned a cheek for Rhett's lips.  There were crowds of people in
the depot or she would never have invited this caress.  She could
not help noticing, for all her embarrassment at Bonnie's
appearance, that everyone in the crowd was smiling at the figure
father and daughter cut, smiling not in derision but in genuine
amusement and kindness.  Everyone knew that Scarlett's youngest had
her father under her thumb and Atlanta was amused and approving.
Rhett's great love for his child had gone far toward reinstating
him in public opinion.

On the way home, Scarlett was full of County news.  The hot, dry
weather was making the cotton grow so fast you could almost hear it
but Will said cotton prices were going to be low this fall.
Suellen was going to have another baby--she spelled this out so the
children would not comprehend--and Ella had shown unwonted spirit
in biting Suellen's oldest girl.  Though, observed Scarlett, it was
no more than little Susie deserved, she being her mother all over
again.  But Suellen had become infuriated and they had had an
invigorating quarrel that was just like old times.  Wade had killed
a water moccasin, all by himself.  'Randa and Camilla Tarleton were
teaching school and wasn't that a joke?  Not a one of the Tarletons
had ever been able to spell cat!  Betsy Tarleton had married a fat
one-armed man from Lovejoy and they and Hetty and Jim Tarleton were
raising a good cotton crop at Fairhill.  Mrs. Tarleton had a brood
mare and a colt and was as happy as though she had a million
dollars.  And there were negroes living in the old Calvert house!
Swarms of them and they actually owned it!  They'd bought it in at
the sheriff's sale.  The place was dilapidated and it made you cry
to look at it.  No one knew where Cathleen and her no-good husband
had gone.  And Alex was to marry Sally, his brother's widow!
Imagine that, after them living in the same house for so many
years!  Everybody said it was a marriage of convenience because
people were beginning to gossip about them living there alone,
since both Old Miss and Young Miss had died.  And it had about
broken Dimity Munroe's heart.  But it served her right.  If she'd
had any gumption she'd have caught her another man long ago,
instead of waiting for Alex to get money enough to marry her.

Scarlett chattered on cheerfully but there were many things about
the County which she suppressed, things that hurt to think about.
She had driven over the County with Will, trying not to remember
when these thousands of fertile acres had stood green with cotton.
Now, plantation after plantation was going back to the forest, and
dismal fields of broomsedge, scrub oak and runty pines had grown
stealthily about silent ruins and over old cotton fields.  Only one
acre was being farmed now where once a hundred had been under the
plow.  It was like moving through a dead land.

"This section won't come back for fifty years--if it ever comes
back," Will had said.  "Tara's the best farm in the County, thanks
to you and me, Scarlett, but it's a farm, a two-mule farm, not a
plantation.  And the Fontaine place, it comes next to Tara and then
the Tarletons.  They ain't makin' much money but they're gettin'
along and they got gumption.  But most of the rest of the folks,
the rest of the farms--"

No, Scarlett did not like to remember the way the deserted County
looked.  It seemed even sadder, in retrospect, beside the bustle
and prosperity of Atlanta.

"Has anything happened here?" she asked when they were finally home
and were seated on the front porch.  She had talked rapidly and
continuously all the way home, fearing that a silence would fall.
She had not had a word alone with Rhett since that day when she
fell down the steps and she was none too anxious to be alone with
him now.  She did not know how he felt toward her.  He had been
kindness itself during her miserable convalescence, but it was the
kindness of an impersonal stranger.  He had anticipated her wants,
kept the children from bothering her and supervised the store and
the mills.  But he had never said:  "I'm sorry."  Well, perhaps he
wasn't sorry.  Perhaps he still thought that child that was never
born was not his child.  How could she tell what went on in the
mind behind the bland dark face?  But he had showed a disposition
to be courteous, for the first time in their married life, and a
desire to let life go on as though there had never been anything
unpleasant between them--as though, thought Scarlett, cheerlessly,
as though there had never been anything at all between them.  Well,
if that was what he wanted, she could act her part too.

"Is everything all right?" she repeated.  "Did you get the new
shingles for the store?  Did you swap the mules?  For Heaven's
sake, Rhett, take those feathers out of your hat.  You look a fool
and you'll be likely to wear them downtown without remembering to
take them out."

"No," said Bonnie, picking up her father's hat, defensively.

"Everything has gone very well here," replied Rhett.  "Bonnie and I
have had a nice time and I don't believe her hair has been combed
since you left.  Don't suck the feathers, darling, they may be
nasty.  Yes, the shingles are fixed and I got a good trade on the
mules.  No, there's really no news.  Everything has been quite
dull."

Then, as an afterthought, he added:  "The honorable Ashley was over
here last night.  He wanted to know if I thought you would sell him
your mill and the part interest you have in his."

Scarlett, who had been rocking and fanning herself with a turkey
tail fan, stopped abruptly.

"Sell?  Where on earth did Ashley get the money?  You know they
never have a cent.  Melanie spends it as fast as he makes it."

Rhett shrugged.  "I always thought her a frugal little person, but
then I'm not as well informed about the intimate details of the
Wilkes family as you seem to be."

That jab seemed in something of Rhett's old style and Scarlett grew
annoyed.

"Run away, dear," she said to Bonnie.  "Mother wants to talk to
Father."

"No," said Bonnie positively and climbed upon Rhett's lap.

Scarlett frowned at her child and Bonnie scowled back in so
complete a resemblance to Gerald O'Hara that Scarlett almost
laughed.

"Let her stay," said Rhett comfortably.  "As to where he got the
money, it seems it was sent him by someone he nursed through a case
of smallpox at Rock Island.  It renews my faith in human nature to
know that gratitude still exists."

"Who was it?  Anyone we know?"

"The letter was unsigned and came from Washington.  Ashley was at a
loss to know who could have sent it.  But then, one of Ashley's
unselfish temperament goes about the world doing so many good deeds
that you can't expect him to remember all of them."

Had she not been so surprised at Ashley's windfall, Scarlett would
have taken up this gauntlet, although while at Tara she had decided
that never again would she permit herself to be involved in any
quarrel with Rhett about Ashley.  The ground on which she stood in
this matter was entirely too uncertain and, until she knew exactly
where she stood with both men, she did not care to be drawn out.

"He wants to buy me out?"

"Yes.  But of course, I told him you wouldn't sell."

"I wish you'd let me mind my own business."

"Well, you know you wouldn't part with the mills.  I told him that
he knew as well as I did that you couldn't bear not to have your
finger in everybody's pie, and if you sold out to him, then you
wouldn't be able to tell him how to mind his own business."

"You dared say that to him about me?"

"Why not?  It's true, isn't it?  I believe he heartily agreed with
me but, of course, he was too much of a gentleman to come right out
and say so."

"It's a lie!  I will sell them to him!" cried Scarlett angrily.

Until that moment, she had had no idea of parting with the mills.
She had several reasons for wanting to keep them and their monetary
value was the least reason.  She could have sold them for large
sums any time in the last few years, but she had refused all
offers.  The mills were the tangible evidence of what she had done,
unaided and against great odds, and she was proud of them and of
herself.  Most of all, she did not want to sell them because they
were the only path that lay open to Ashley.  If the mills went from
her control it would mean that she would seldom see Ashley and
probably never see him alone.  And she had to see him alone.  She
could not go on this way any longer, wondering what his feelings
toward her were now, wondering if all his love had died in shame
since the dreadful night of Melanie's party.  In the course of
business she could find many opportune times for conversations
without it appearing to anyone that she was seeking him out.  And,
given time, she knew she could gain back whatever ground she had
lost in his heart.  But if she sold the mills--

No, she did not want to sell but, goaded by the thought that Rhett
had exposed her to Ashley in so truthful and so unflattering a
light, she had made up her mind instantly.  Ashley should have the
mills and at a price so low he could not help realizing how
generous she was.

"I will sell!" she cried furiously.  "Now, what do you think of
that?"

There was the faintest gleam of triumph in Rhett's eyes as he bent
to tie Bonnie's shoe string.

"I think you'll regret it," he said.

Already she was regretting the hasty words.  Had they been spoken
to anyone save Rhett she would have shamelessly retracted them.
Why had she burst out like that?  She looked at Rhett with an angry
frown and saw that he was watching her with his old keen, cat-at-a-
mouse-hole look.  When he saw her frown, he laughed suddenly, his
white teeth flashing.  Scarlett had an uncertain feeling that he
had jockeyed her into this position.

"Did you have anything to do with this?" she snapped.

"I?"  His brows went up in mock surprise.  "You should know me
better.  I never go about the world doing good deeds if I can avoid
it."



That night she sold the mills and all her interest in them to
Ashley.  She did not lose thereby for Ashley refused to take
advantage of her first low offer and met the highest bid that she
had ever had for them.  When she had signed the papers and the
mills were irrevocably gone and Melanie was passing small glasses
of wine to Ashley and Rhett to celebrate the transaction, Scarlett
felt bereft, as though she had sold one of her children.

The mills had been her darlings, her pride, the fruit of her small
grasping hands.  She had started with one little mill in those
black days when Atlanta was barely struggling up from ruin and
ashes and want was staring her in the face.  She had fought and
schemed and nursed them through the dark times when Yankee
confiscation loomed, when money was tight and smart men going to
the wall.  And now when Atlanta was covering its scars and
buildings were going up everywhere and newcomers flocking to the
town every day, she had two fine mills, two lumber yards, a dozen
mule teams and convict labor to operate the business at low cost.
Bidding farewell to them was like closing a door forever on a part
of her life, a bitter, harsh part but one which she recalled with a
nostalgic satisfaction.

She had built up this business and now she had sold it and she was
oppressed with the certainty that, without her at the helm, Ashley
would lose it all--everything that she had worked to build.  Ashley
trusted everyone and still hardly knew a two-by-four from a six-by-
eight.  And now she would never be able to give him the benefit of
her advice--all because Rhett had told him that she liked to boss
everything.

"Oh, damn Rhett!" she thought and as she watched him the conviction
grew that he was at the bottom of all this.  Just how and why she
did not know.  He was talking to Ashley and his words brought her
up sharply.

"I suppose you'll turn the convicts back right away," he said.

Turn the convicts back?  Why should there be any idea of turning
them back?  Rhett knew perfectly well that the large profits from
the mills grew out of the cheap convict labor.  And why did Rhett
speak with such certainty about what Ashley's future actions would
be?  What did he know of him?

"Yes, they'll go back immediately," replied Ashley and he avoided
Scarlett's dumbfounded gaze.

"Have you lost your mind?" she cried.  "You'll lose all the money
on the lease and what kind of labor can you get, anyway?"

"I'll use free darkies," said Ashley.

"Free darkies!  Fiddle-dee-dee!  You know what their wages will
cost and besides you'll have the Yankees on your neck every minute
to see if you're giving them chicken three times a day and tucking
them to sleep under eiderdown quilts.  And if you give a lazy darky
a couple of licks to speed him up, you'll hear the Yankees scream
from here to Dalton and you'll end up in jail.  Why, convicts are
the only--"

Melanie looked down into her lap at her twisted hands.  Ashley
looked unhappy but obdurate.  For a moment he was silent.  Then his
gaze crossed Rhett's and it was as if he found understanding and
encouragement in Rhett's eyes--a glance that was not lost on
Scarlett.

"I won't work convicts, Scarlett," he said quietly.

"Well, sir!" her breath was taken away.  "And why not?  Are you
afraid people will talk about you like they do about me?"

Ashley raised his head.

"I'm not afraid of what people say as long as I'm right.  And I
have never felt that convict labor was right."

"But why--"

"I can't make money from the enforced labor and misery of others."

"But you owned slaves!"

"They weren't miserable.  And besides, I'd have freed them all when
Father died if the war hadn't already freed them.  But this is
different, Scarlett.  The system is open to too many abuses.
Perhaps you don't know it but I do.  I know very well that Johnnie
Gallegher has killed at least one man at his camp.  Maybe more--who
cares about one convict, more or less?  He said the man was killed
trying to escape, but that's not what I've heard elsewhere.  And I
know he works men who are too sick to work.  Call it superstition,
but I do not believe that happiness can come from money made from
the sufferings of others."

"God's nightgown!  You mean--goodness, Ashley, you didn't swallow
all the Reverend Wallace's bellowings about tainted money?"

"I didn't have to swallow it.  I believed it long before he
preached on it."

"Then, you must think all my money is tainted," cried Scarlett
beginning to be angry.  "Because I worked convicts and own saloon
property and--"  She stopped short.  Both the Wilkes looked
embarrassed and Rhett was grinning broadly.  Damn him, thought
Scarlett, vehemently.  He's thinking that I'm sticking my finger in
other people's pies again and so is Ashley.  I'd like to crack
their heads together!  She swallowed her wrath and tried to assume
an aloof air of dignity but with little success.

"Of course, it's immaterial to me," she said.

"Scarlett, don't think I'm criticizing you!  I'm not.  It's just
that we look at things in different ways and what is good for you
might not be good for me."

She suddenly wished that they were alone, wished ardently that
Rhett and Melanie were at the end of the earth, so she could cry
out:  "But I want to look at things the way you look at them!  Tell
me just what you mean, so I can understand and be like you!"

But with Melanie present, trembling with the distress of the scene,
and Rhett lounging, grinning at her, she could only say with as
much coolness and offended virtue as she could muster:  "I'm sure
it's your own business, Ashley, and far be it from me to tell you
how to run it.  But, I must say, I do not understand your attitude
or your remarks."

Oh, if they were only alone, so she would not be forced to say
these cool things to him, these words that were making him unhappy!

"I've offended you, Scarlett, and I did not mean to.  You must
believe me and forgive me.  There is nothing enigmatic in what I
said.  It is only that I believe that money which comes in certain
ways seldom brings happiness."

"But you're wrong!" she cried, unable to restrain herself any
longer.  "Look at me!  You know how my money came.  You know how
things were before I made my money!  You remember that winter at
Tara when it was so cold and we were cutting up the carpets for
shoes and there wasn't enough to eat and we used to wonder how we
were going to give Beau and Wade an education.  You remem--"

"I remember," said Ashley tiredly, "but I'd rather forget."

"Well, you can't say any of us were happy then, can you?  And look
at us now!  You've a nice home and a good future.  And has anyone a
prettier house than mine or nicer clothes or finer horses?  Nobody
sets as fine a table as me or gives nicer receptions and my
children have everything they want.  Well, how did I get the money
to make it possible?  Off trees?  No, sir!  Convicts and saloon
rentals and--"

"And don't forget murdering that Yankee," said Rhett softly.  "He
really gave you your start."

Scarlett swung on him, furious words on her lips.

"And the money has made you very, very happy, hasn't it, darling?"
he asked, poisonously sweet.

Scarlett stopped short, her mouth open, and her eyes went swiftly
to the eyes of the other three.  Melanie was almost crying with
embarrassment, Ashley was suddenly bleak and withdrawn and Rhett
was watching her over his cigar with impersonal amusement.  She
started to cry out:  "But of course, it's made me happy!"

But somehow, she could not speak.



CHAPTER LVIII


In the time that followed her illness Scarlett noticed a change in
Rhett and she was not altogether certain that she liked it.  He was
sober and quiet and preoccupied.  He was at home more often for
supper now and he was kinder to the servants and more affectionate
to Wade and Ella.  He never referred to anything in their past,
pleasant or otherwise, and silently seemed to dare her to bring up
such subjects.  Scarlett held her peace, for it was easier to let
well enough alone, and life went on smoothly enough, on the
surface.  His impersonal courtesy toward her that had begun during
her convalescence continued and he did not fling softly drawled
barbs at her or sting her with sarcasm.  She realized now that
though he had infuriated her with his malicious comments and roused
her to heated rejoinders, he had done it because he cared what she
did and said.  Now she wondered if he cared about anything she did.
He was polite and disinterested and she missed his interest,
perverse though it had been, missed the old days of bickering and
retort.

He was pleasant to her now, almost as though she were a stranger;
but, as his eyes had once followed her, they now followed Bonnie.
It was as though the swift flood of his life had been diverted into
one narrow channel.  Sometimes Scarlett thought that if Rhett had
given her one-half the attention and tenderness he lavished on
Bonnie, life would have been different.  Sometimes it was hard to
smile when people said:  "How Captain Butler idolizes that child!"
But, if she did not smile, people would think it strange and
Scarlett hated to acknowledge, even to herself, that she was
jealous of a little girl, especially when that little girl was her
favorite child.  Scarlett always wanted to be first in the hearts
of those around her and it was obvious now that Rhett and Bonnie
would always be first with each other.

Rhett was out late many nights but he came home sober on these
nights.  Often she heard him whistling softly to himself as he went
down the hall past her closed door.  Sometimes men came home with
him in the late hours and sat talking in the dining room around the
brandy decanter.  They were not the same men with whom he had drunk
the first year they were married.  No rich Carpetbaggers, no
Scallawags, no Republicans came to the house now at his invitation.
Scarlett, creeping on tiptoe to the banister of the upstairs hall,
listened and, to her amazement, frequently heard the voices of Rene
Picard, Hugh Elsing, the Simmons boys and Andy Bonnell.  And always
Grandpa Merriwether and Uncle Henry were there.  Once, to her
astonishment, she heard the tones of Dr. Meade.  And these men had
once thought hanging too good for Rhett!

This group was always linked in her mind with Frank's death, and
the late hours Rhett kept these days reminded her still more of the
times preceding the Klan foray when Frank lost his life.  She
remembered with dread Rhett's remark that he would even join their
damned Klan to be respectable, though he hoped God would not lay so
heavy a penance on his shoulders.  Suppose Rhett, like Frank--

One night when he was out later than usual she could stand the
strain no longer.  When she heard the rasp of his key in the lock,
she threw on a wrapper and, going into the gas lit upper hall, met
him at the top of the stairs.  His expression, absent, thoughtful,
changed to surprise when he saw her standing there.

"Rhett, I've got to know!  I've got to know if you--if it's the
Klan--is that why you stay out so late?  Do you belong--"

In the flaring gas light he looked at her incuriously and then he
smiled.

"You are way behind the times," he said.  "There is no Klan in
Atlanta now.  Probably not in Georgia.  You've been listening to
the Klan outrage stories of your Scallawag and Carpetbagger
friends."

"No Klan?  Are you lying to try to soothe me?"

"My dear, when did I ever try to soothe you?  No, there is no Klan
now.  We decided that it did more harm than good because it just
kept the Yankees stirred up and furnished more grist for the
slander mill of his excellency, Governor Bullock.  He knows he can
stay in power just so long as he can convince the Federal
government and the Yankee newspapers that Georgia is seething with
rebellion and there's a Klansman hiding behind every bush.  To keep
in power he's been desperately manufacturing Klan outrage stories
where none exist, telling of loyal Republicans being hung up by the
thumbs and honest darkies lynched for rape.  But he's shooting at a
nonexistent target and he knows it.  Thank you for your
apprehensions, but there hasn't been an active Klan since shortly
after I stopped being a Scallawag and became an humble Democrat."

Most of what he said about Governor Bullock went in one ear and out
the other for her mind was mainly occupied with relief that there
was no Klan any longer.  Rhett would not be killed as Frank was
killed; she wouldn't lose her store or his money.  But one word of
his conversation swam to the top of her mind.  He had said "we,"
linking himself naturally with those he had once called the "Old
Guard."

"Rhett," she asked suddenly, "did you have anything to do with the
breaking up of the Klan?"

He gave her a long look and his eyes began to dance.

"My love, I did.  Ashley Wilkes and I are mainly responsible."

"Ashley--and you?"

"Yes, platitudinously but truly, politics make strange bedfellows.
Neither Ashley nor I cared much for each other as bedfellows but--
Ashley never believed in the Klan because he's against violence of
any sort.  And I never believed in it because it's damned
foolishness and not the way to get what we want.  It's the one way
to keep the Yankees on our necks till Kingdom Come.  And between
Ashley and me, we convinced the hot heads that watching, waiting
and working would get us further than nightshirts and fiery
crosses."

"You don't mean the boys actually took your advice when you--"

"When I was a speculator?  A Scallawag?  A consorter with Yankees?
You forget, Mrs. Butler, that I am now a Democrat in good standing,
devoted to my last drop of blood to recovering our beloved state
from the hands of her ravishers!  My advice was good advice and
they took it.  My advice in other political matters is equally
good.  We have a Democratic majority in the legislature now,
haven't we?  And soon, my love, we will have some of our good
Republican friends behind the bars.  They are a bit too rapacious
these days, a bit too open."

"You'd help put them in jail?  Why, they were your friends!  They
let you in on that railroad-bond business that you made thousands
out of!"

Rhett grinned suddenly, his old mocking grin.

"Oh, I bear them no ill will.  But I'm on the other side now and if
I can assist in any way in putting them where they belong, I'll do
it.  And how that will redound to my credit!  I know just enough
about the inside of some of these deals to be very valuable when
the legislature starts digging into them--and that won't be far
off, from the way things look now.  They're going to investigate
the governor, too, and they'll put him in jail if they can.  Better
tell your good friends the Gelerts and the Hundons to be ready to
leave town on a minute's notice, because if they can nab the
governor, they'll nab them too."

For too many years Scarlett had seen the Republicans, backed up by
the force of the Yankee Army, in power in Georgia to believe
Rhett's light words.  The governor was too strongly entrenched for
any legislature to do anything to him, much less put him in jail.

"How you do run on," she observed.

"If he isn't put in jail, at least he won't be reelected.  We're
going to have a Democratic governor next time, for a change."

"And I suppose you'll have something to do with it?" she questioned
sarcastically.

"My pet, I will.  I am having something to do with it now.  That's
why I stay out so late at nights.  I'm working harder than I ever
worked with a shovel in the gold rush, trying to help get the
election organized.  And--I know this will hurt you, Mrs. Butler,
but I am contributing plenty of money to the organization, too.  Do
you remember telling me, years ago, in Frank's store, that it was
dishonest for me to keep the Confederate gold?  At last I've come
to agree with you and the Confederate gold is being spent to get
the Confederates back into power."

"You're pouring money down a rat hole!"

"What!  You call the Democratic party a rat hole?"  His eyes mocked
her and then were quiet, expressionless.  "It doesn't matter a damn
to me who wins this election.  What does matter is that everyone
knows I've worked for it and that I've spent money on it.  And
that'll be remembered in Bonnie's favor in years to come."

"I was almost afraid from your pious talk that you'd had a change
of heart, but I see you've got no more sincerity about the
Democrats than about anything else."

"Not a change of heart at all.  Merely a change of hide.  You might
possibly sponge the spots off a leopard but he'd remain a leopard,
just the same."

Bonnie, awakened by the sound of voices in the hall, called sleepily
but imperiously:  "Daddy!" and Rhett started past Scarlett.

"Rhett, wait a minute.  There's something else I want to tell you.
You must stop taking Bonnie around with you in the afternoons to
political meetings.  It just doesn't look well.  The idea of a
little girl at such places!  And it makes you look so silly.  I
never dreamed that you took her until Uncle Henry mentioned it, as
though he thought I knew and--"

He swung round on her and his face was hard.

"How can you read wrong in a little girl sitting on her father's
lap while he talks to friends?  You may think it looks silly but it
isn't silly.  People will remember for years that Bonnie sat on my
lap while I helped run the Republicans out of this state.  People
will remember for years--"  The hardness went out of his face and a
malicious light danced in his eyes.  "Did you know that when people
ask her who she loves best, she says 'Daddy and the Demiquats,' and
who she hates most, she says:  'The Scallywags.'  People, thank
God, remember things like that."

Scarlett's voice rose furiously.  "And I suppose you tell her I'm a
Scallawag!"

"Daddy!" said the small voice, indignant now, and Rhett, still
laughing, went down the hall to his daughter.



That October Governor Bullock resigned his office and fled from
Georgia.  Misuse of public funds, waste and corruption had reached
such proportions during his administration that the edifice was
toppling of its own weight.  Even his own party was split, so great
had public indignation become.  The Democrats had a majority in the
legislature now, and that meant just one thing.  Knowing that he
was going to be investigated and fearing impeachment, Bullock did
not wait.  He hastily and secretly decamped, arranging that his
resignation would not become public until he was safely in the
North.

When it was announced, a week after his flight, Atlanta was wild
with excitement and joy.  People thronged the streets, men laughing
and shaking hands in congratulation, ladies kissing each other and
crying.  Everybody gave parties in celebration and the fire
department was kept busy fighting the flames that spread from the
bonfires of jubilant small boys.

Almost out of the woods!  Reconstruction's almost over! to be sure,
the acting governor was a Republican too, but the election was
coming up in December and there was no doubt in anyone's mind as to
what the result would be.  And when the election came, despite the
frantic efforts of the Republicans, Georgia once more had a
Democratic governor.

There was joy then, excitement too, but of a different sort from
that which seized the town when Bullock took to his heels.  This was
a more sober heartfelt joy, a deep-souled feeling of thanksgiving,
and the churches were filled as ministers reverently thanked God for
the deliverance of the state.  There was pride too, mingled with the
elation and joy, pride that Georgia was back in the hands of her own
people again, in spite of all the administration in Washington could
do, in spite of the army, the Carpetbaggers, the Scallawags and the
native Republicans.

Seven times Congress had passed crushing acts against the state to
keep it a conquered province, three times the army had set aside
civil law.  The negroes had frolicked through the legislature,
grasping aliens had mismanaged the government, private individuals
had enriched themselves from public funds.  Georgia had been
helpless, tormented, abused, hammered down.  But now, in spite of
them all, Georgia belonged to herself again and through the efforts
of her own people.

The sudden overturn of the Republicans did not bring joy to
everyone.  There was consternation in the ranks of the Scallawags,
the Carpetbaggers and the Republicans.  The Gelerts and Hundons,
evidently apprised of Bullock's departure before his resignation
became public, left town abruptly, disappearing into that oblivion
from which they had come.  The other Carpetbaggers and Scallawags
who remained were uncertain, frightened, and they hovered together
for comfort, wondering what the legislative investigation would
bring to light concerning their own private affairs.  They were not
insolent now.  They were stunned, bewildered, afraid.  And the
ladies who called on Scarlett said over and over:

"But who would have thought it would turn out this way?  We thought
the governor was too powerful.  We thought he was here to stay.  We
thought--"

Scarlett was equally bewildered by the turn of events, despite
Rhett's warning as to the direction it would take.  It was not that
she was sorry Bullock had gone and the Democrats were back again.
Though no one would have believed it she, too, felt a grim
happiness that the Yankee rule was at last thrown off.  She
remembered all too vividly her struggles during those first days of
Reconstruction, her fears that the soldiers and the Carpetbaggers
would confiscate her money and her property.  She remembered her
helplessness and her panic at her helplessness and her hatred of
the Yankees who had imposed this galling system upon the South.
And she had never stopped hating them.  But, in trying to make the
best of things, in trying to obtain complete security, she had gone
with the conquerors.  No matter how much she disliked them, she had
surrounded herself with them, cut herself off from her old friends
and her old ways of living.  And now the power of the conquerors
was at an end.  She had gambled on the continuance of the Bullock
regime and she had lost.

As she looked about her, that Christmas of 1871, the happiest
Christmas the state had known in over ten years, she was disquieted.
She could not help seeing that Rhett, once the most execrated man in
Atlanta, was now one of the most popular, for he had humbly recanted
his Republican heresies and given his time and money and labor and
thought to helping Georgia fight her way back.  When he rode down
the streets, smiling, tipping his hat, the small blue bundle that
was Bonnie perched before him on his saddle, everyone smiled back,
spoke with enthusiasm and looked with affection on the little girl.
Whereas, she, Scarlett--



CHAPTER LIX


There was no doubt in anyone's mind that Bonnie Butler was running
wild and needed a firm hand but she was so general a favorite that
no one had the heart to attempt the necessary firmness.  She had
first gotten out of control the months when she traveled with her
father.  When she had been with Rhett in New Orleans and Charleston
she had been permitted to sit up as late as she pleased and had
gone to sleep in his arms in theaters, restaurants and at card
tables.  Thereafter, nothing short of force would make her go to
bed at the same time as the obedient Ella.  While she had been away
with him, Rhett had let her wear any dress she chose and, since
that time, she had gone into tantrums when Mammy tried to dress her
in dimity frocks and pinafores instead of blue taffeta and lace
collars.

There seemed no way to regain the ground which had been lost when
the child was away from home and later when Scarlett had been ill
and at Tara.  As Bonnie grew older Scarlett tried to discipline
her, tried to keep her from becoming too headstrong and spoiled,
but with little success.  Rhett always sided with the child, no
matter how foolish her desires or how outrageous her behavior.  He
encouraged her to talk and treated her as an adult, listening to
her opinions with apparent seriousness and pretending to be guided
by them.  As a result, Bonnie interrupted her elders whenever she
pleased and contradicted her father and put him in his place.  He
only laughed and would not permit Scarlett even to slap the little
girl's hand by way of reprimand.

"If she wasn't such a sweet, darling thing, she'd be impossible,"
thought Scarlett ruefully, realizing that she had a child with a
will equal to her own.  "She adores Rhett and he could make her
behave better if he wanted to."

But Rhett showed no inclination to make Bonnie behave.  Whatever
she did was right and if she wanted the moon she could have it, if
he could reach it for her.  His pride in her beauty, her curls, her
dimples, her graceful little gestures was boundless.  He loved her
pertness, her high spirits and the quaint sweet manner she had of
showing her love for him.  For all her spoiled and willful ways she
was such a lovable child that he lacked the heart to try to curb
her.  He was her god, the center of her small world, and that was
too precious for him to risk losing by reprimands.

She clung to him like a shadow.  She woke him earlier than he cared
to wake, sat beside him at the table, eating alternately from his
plate and her own, rode in front of him on his horse and permitted
no one but Rhett to undress her and put her to sleep in the small
bed beside his.

It amused and touched Scarlett to see the iron hand with which her
small child ruled her father.  Who would have thought that Rhett,
of all people, would take fatherhood so seriously?  But sometimes a
dart of jealousy went through Scarlett because Bonnie, at the age
of four, understood Rhett better than she had ever understood him
and could manage him better than she had ever managed him.

When Bonnie was four years old, Mammy began to grumble about the
impropriety of a girl child riding "a-straddle in front of her pa
wid her dress flyin' up."  Rhett lent an attentive ear to this
remark, as he did to all Mammy's remarks about the proper raising
of little girls.  The result was a small brown and white Shetland
pony with a long silky mane and tail and a tiny sidesaddle with
silver trimmings.  Ostensibly the pony was for all three children
and Rhett bought a saddle for Wade too.  But Wade infinitely
preferred his St. Bernard dog and Ella was afraid of all animals.
So the pony became Bonnie's own and was named "Mr. Butler."  The
only flaw in Bonnie's possessive joy was that she could not still
ride astride like her father, but after he had explained how much
more difficult it was to ride on the sidesaddle, she was content
and learned rapidly.  Rhett's pride in her good seat and her good
hands was enormous.

"Wait till she's old enough to hunt," he boasted.  "There'll be no
one like her on any field.  I'll take her to Virginia then.  That's
where the real hunting is.  And Kentucky where they appreciate good
riders."

When it came to making her riding habit, as usual she had her
choice of colors and as usual chose blue.

"But, my darling!  Not that blue velvet!  The blue velvet is for a
party dress for me," laughed Scarlett.  "A nice black broadcloth is
what little girls wear."  Seeing the small black brows coming
together:  "For Heaven's sake, Rhett, tell her how unsuitable it
would be and how dirty it will get."

"Oh, let her have the blue velvet.  If it gets dirty, we'll make
her another one," said Rhett easily.

So Bonnie had her blue velvet habit with a skirt that trailed down
the pony's side and a black hat with a red plume in it, because
Aunt Melly's stories of Jeb Stuart's plume had appealed to her
imagination.  On days that were bright and clear the two could be
seen riding down Peachtree Street, Rhett reining in his big black
horse to keep pace with the fat pony's gait.  Sometimes they went
tearing down the quiet roads about the town, scattering chickens
and dogs and children, Bonnie beating Mr. Butler with her crop, her
tangled curls flying, Rhett holding in his horse with a firm hand
that she might think Mr. Butler was winning the race.

When he had assured himself of her seat, her hands, her utter
fearlessness, Rhett decided that the time had come for her to learn
to make the low jumps that were within the reach of Mr. Butler's
short legs.  To this end, he built a hurdle in the back yard and
paid Wash, one of Uncle Peter's small nephews, twenty-five cents a
day to teach Mr. Butler to jump.  He began with a bar two inches
from the ground and gradually worked up the height to a foot.

This arrangement met with the disapproval of the three parties
concerned, Wash, Mr. Butler and Bonnie.  Wash was afraid of horses
and only the princely sum offered induced him to take the stubborn
pony over the bar dozens of times a day; Mr. Butler, who bore with
equanimity having his tail pulled by his small mistress and his
hooves examined constantly, felt that the Creator of ponies had not
intended him to put his fat body over the bar; Bonnie, who could
not bear to see anyone else upon her pony, danced with impatience
while Mr. Butler was learning his lessons.

When Rhett finally decided that the pony knew his business well
enough to trust Bonnie upon him, the child's excitement was
boundless.  She made her first jump with flying colors and,
thereafter, riding abroad with her father held no charms for her.
Scarlett could not help laughing at the pride and enthusiasm of
father and daughter.  She thought, however, that once the novelty
had passed, Bonnie would turn to other things and the neighborhood
would have some peace.  But this sport did not pall.  There was a
bare track worn from the arbor at the far end of the yard to the
hurdle, and all morning long the yard resounded with excited yells.
Grandpa Merriwether, who had made the overland trip in 1849, said
that the yells sounded just like an Apache after a successful
scalping.

After the first week, Bonnie begged for a higher bar, a bar that
was a foot and a half from the ground.

"When you are six years old," said Rhett.  "Then you'll be big
enough for a higher jump and I'll buy you a bigger horse.  Mr.
Butler's legs aren't long enough."

"They are, too, I jumped Aunt Melly's rose bushes and they are
'normously high!"

"No, you must wait," said Rhett, firm for once.  But the firmness
gradually faded away before her incessant importunings and
tantrums.

"Oh, all right," he said with a laugh one morning and moved the
narrow white cross bar higher.  "If you fall off, don't cry and
blame me!"

"Mother!" screamed Bonnie, turning her head up toward Scarlett's
bedroom.  "Mother!  Watch me!  Daddy says I can!"

Scarlett, who was combing her hair, came to the window and smiled
down at the tiny excited figure, so absurd in the soiled blue
habit.

"I really must get her another habit," she thought.  "Though Heaven
only knows how I'll make her give up that dirty one."

"Mother, watch!"

"I'm watching dear," said Scarlett smiling.

As Rhett lifted the child and set her on the pony, Scarlett called
with a swift rush of pride at the straight back and the proud set
of the head,

"You're mighty pretty, precious!"

"So are you," said Bonnie generously and, hammering a heel into Mr.
Butler's ribs, she galloped down the yard toward the arbor.

"Mother, watch me take this one!" she cried, laying on the crop.

WATCH ME TAKE THIS ONE!

Memory rang a bell far back in Scarlett's mind.  There was
something ominous about those words.  What was it?  Why couldn't
she remember?  She looked down at her small daughter, so lightly
poised on the galloping pony and her brow wrinkled as a chill swept
swiftly through her breast.  Bonnie came on with a rush, her crisp
black curls jerking, her blue eyes blazing.

"They are like Pa's eyes," thought Scarlett, "Irish blue eyes and
she's just like him in every way."

And, as she thought of Gerald, the memory for which she had been
fumbling came to her swiftly, came with the heart stopping clarity
of summer lightning, throwing, for an instant, a whole countryside
into unnatural brightness.  She could hear an Irish voice singing,
hear the hard rapid pounding of hooves coming up the pasture hill
at Tara, hear a reckless voice, so like the voice of her child:
"Ellen!  Watch me take this one!"

"No!" she cried.  "No!  Oh, Bonnie, stop!"

Even as she leaned from the window there was a fearful sound of
splintering wood, a hoarse cry from Rhett, a melee of blue velvet
and flying hooves on the ground.  Then Mr. Butler scrambled to his
feet and trotted off with an empty saddle.



On the third night after Bonnie's death, Mammy waddled slowly up
the kitchen steps of Melanie's house.  She was dressed in black
from her huge men's shoes, slashed to permit freedom for her toes,
to her black head rag.  Her blurred old eyes were bloodshot and red
rimmed, and misery cried out in every line of her mountainous
figure.  Her face was puckered in the sad bewilderment of an old
ape but there was determination in her jaw.

She spoke a few soft words to Dilcey who nodded kindly, as though
an unspoken armistice existed in their old feud.  Dilcey put down
the supper dishes she was holding and went quietly through the
pantry toward the dining room.  In a minute Melanie was in the
kitchen, her table napkin in her hand, anxiety in her face.

"Miss Scarlet isn't--"

"Miss Scarlett bearin' up, same as allus," said Mammy heavily.  "Ah
din' ten ter 'sturb yo' supper, Miss Melly.  Ah kin wait tell you
thoo ter tell you whut Ah got on mah mine."

"Supper can wait," said Melanie.  "Dilcey, serve the rest of the
supper.  Mammy, come with me."

Mammy waddled after her, down the hall past the dining room where
Ashley sat at the head of the table, his own little Beau beside him
and Scarlett's two children opposite, making a great clatter with
their soup spoons.  The happy voices of Wade and Ella filled the
room.  It was like a picnic for them to spend so long a visit with
Aunt Melly.  Aunt Melly was always so kind and she was especially
so now.  The death of their younger sister had affected them very
little.  Bonnie had fallen off her pony and Mother had cried a long
time and Aunt Melly had taken them home with her to play in the
back yard with Beau and have tea cakes whenever they wanted them.

Melanie led the way to the small book-lined sitting room, shut the
door and motioned Mammy to the sofa.

"I was going over right after supper," she said.  "Now that Captain
Butler's mother has come, I suppose the funeral will be tomorrow
morning."

"De fune'l.  Dat's jes' it," said Mammy.  "Miss Melly, we's all in
deep trouble an' Ah's come ter you fer he'p.  Ain' nuthin' but
weery load, honey, nuthin' but weery load."

"Has Miss Scarlett collapsed?" questioned Melanie worriedly.  "I've
hardly seen her since Bonnie--  She has been in her room and
Captain Butler has been out of the house and--"

Suddenly tears began to flow down Mammy's black face.  Melanie sat
down beside her and patted her arm and, after a moment, Mammy
lifted the hem of her black skirt and dried her eyes.

"You got ter come he'p us, Miss Melly.  Ah done de bes' Ah kin but
it doan do no good."

"Miss Scarlett--"

Mammy straightened.

"Miss Melly, you knows Miss Scarlett well's Ah does.  Whut dat
chile got ter stan', de good Lawd give her strent ter stan'.
Disyere done broke her heart but she kin stan' it.  It's Mist'
Rhett Ah come 'bout."

"I have so wanted to see him but whenever I've been there, he has
either been downtown or locked in his room with--  And Scarlett has
looked like a ghost and wouldn't speak--  Tell me quickly, Mammy.
You know I'll help if I can."

Mammy wiped her nose on the back of her hand.

"Ah say Miss Scarlett kin stan' whut de Lawd sen', kase she done
had ter stan' a-plen'y, but Mist' Rhett--Miss Melly, he ain' never
had ter stan' nuthin' he din' wanter stan', not nuthin'.  It's him
Ah come ter see you 'bout."

"But--"

"Miss Melly, you got ter come home wid me, dis evenin'."  There was
urgency in Mammy's voice.  "Maybe Mist' Rhett lissen ter you.  He
allus did think a heap of yo' 'pinion."

"Oh, Mammy, what is it?  What do you mean?"

Mammy squared her shoulders.

"Miss Melly, Mist' Rhett done--done los' his mine.  He woan let us
put Lil Miss away."

"Lost his mind?  Oh, Mammy, no!"

"Ah ain' lyin'.  It's de Gawd's truff.  He ain' gwine let us buhy
dat chile.  He done tole me so hisseff, not mo'n an hour ago."

"But he can't--he isn't--"

"Dat's huccome Ah say he los' his mine."

"But why--"

"Miss Melly, Ah tell you eve'ything.  Ah oughtn' tell nobody, but
you is our fambly an' you is de onlies' one Ah kin tell.  Ah tell
you eve'ything.  You knows whut a sto' he set by dat chile.  Ah
ain' never seed no man, black or w'ite, set sech a sto' by any
chile.  Look lak he go plumb crazy w'en Doctah Meade say her neck
broke.  He grab his gun an' he run right out an' shoot dat po' pony
an', fo' Gawd, Ah think he gwine shoot hisseff.  Ah wuz plumb
'stracted whut wid Miss Scarlett in a swoon an' all de neighbors in
an' outer de house an' Mist' Rhett cahyin' on an' jes' holin' dat
chile an' not even lettin' me wash her lil face whar de grabble cut
it.  An' w'en Miss Scarlett come to, Ah think, bress Gawd!  Now dey
kin comfo't each other."

Again the tears began to fall but this time Mammy did not even wipe
them away.

"But w'en she come to, she go inter de room whar he settin', holin'
Miss Bonnie, an' she say:  'Gimme mah baby whut you kilt.'"

"Oh, no!  She couldn't!"

"Yas'm.  Dat whut she say.  She say:  'You kilt her.'  An' Ah felt
so sorry fer Mist' Rhett Ah bust out cryin', kase he look lak a
whup houn'.  An' Ah say:  'Give dat chile ter its mammy.  Ah ain'
gwine have no sech goin's on over mah Lil Miss.'  An' Ah tek de
chile away frum him an' tek her inter her room an' wash her face.
An' Ah hear dem talkin' an' it lak ter tuhn mah blood cole, whut
dey say.  Miss Scarlett wuz callin' him a mudderer fer lettin' her
try ter jump dat high, an' him sayin' Miss Scarlett hadn' never
keered nuthin' 'bout Miss Bonnie nor none of her chillun. . . ."

"Stop, Mammy!  Don't tell me any more.  It isn't right for you to
tell me this!" cried Melanie, her mind shrinking away from the
picture Mammy's words evoked.

"Ah knows Ah got no bizness tellin' you, but mah heart too full ter
know jes' whut not ter say.  Den he tuck her ter de unnertaker's
hisseff an' he bring her back an' he put her in her baid in his
room.  An' w'en Miss Scarlett say she b'long in de pahlor in de
coffin, Ah thought Mist' Rhett gwine hit her.  An' he say, right
cole lak:  'She b'long in mah room.'  An' he tuhn ter me an' he
say:  'Mammy, you see dat she stay right hyah tell Ah gits back.'
Den he light outer de house on de hawse an' he wuz gone tell 'bout
sundown.  W'en he come t'arin' home, Ah seed dat he'd been drinkin'
an' drinkin' heavy, but he wuz cahyin' it well's usual.  He fling
inter de house an' not even speak ter Miss Scarlett or Miss Pitty
or any of de ladies as wuz callin', but he fly up de steps an'
th'ow open de do' of his room an' den he yell for me.  W'en Ah
comes runnin' as fas' as Ah kin, he wuz stan'in' by de baid an' it
wuz so dahk in de room Ah couldn' sceercely see him, kase de
shutters wuz done drawed.

"An' he say ter me, right fierce lak:  'Open dem shutters.  It's
dahk in hyah.'  An' Ah fling dem open an' he look at me an', fo'
Gawd, Miss Melly, mah knees 'bout give way, kase he look so
strange.  Den he say:  'Bring lights.  Bring lots of lights.  An'
keep dem buhnin'.  An' doan draw no shades an' no shutters.  Doan
you know Miss Bonnie's 'fraid of de dahk?'"

Melanie's horror struck eyes met Mammy's and Mammy nodded ominously.

"Dat's whut he say.  'Miss Bonnie's 'fraid of de dahk.'"

Mammy shivvered.

"W'en Ah gits him a dozen candles, he say 'Git!'  An' den he lock
de do' an' dar he set wid Lil Miss, an' he din' open de do' fer
Miss Scarlett even w'en she beat an' hollered ter him.  An' dat's
de way it been fer two days.  He woan say nuthin' 'bout de fune'l,
an' in de mawnin' he lock de do' an' git on his hawse an' go off
ter town.  An' he come back at sundown drunk an' lock hisseff in
agin, an' he ain' et nuthin' or slept none.  An' now his ma, Ole
Miss Butler, she come frum Cha'ston fer de fune'l an' Miss Suellen
an' Mist' Will, dey come frum Tara, but Mist' Rhett woan talk ter
none of dem.  Oh, Miss Melly, it been awful!  An' it's gwine be
wuss, an' folks gwine talk sumpin' scan'lous.

"An' den, dis evenin'," Mammy paused and again wiped her nose on
her hand.  "Dis evenin' Miss Scarleft ketch him in de upstairs hall
w'en he come in, an' she go in de room wid him an' she say:  'De
fune'l set fer termorrer mawnin'.'  An' he say:  'Do dat an' Ah
kills you termorrer.'"

"Oh, he must have lost his mind!"

"Yas'm.  An' den dey talks kinder low an' Ah doan hear all whut dey
say, 'cept he say agin 'bout Miss Bonnie bein' sceered of de dahk
an' de grabe pow'ful dahk.  An' affer aw'ile, Miss Scarlett say:
'You is a fine one ter tek on so, affer killin' her ter please yo'
pride.'  An' he say:  'Ain' you got no mercy?'  An' she say:  'No.
An' Ah ain' got no chile, needer.  An' Ah'm wo'out wid de way you
been ackin' sence Bonnie wuz kilt.  You is a scan'al ter de town.
You been drunk all de time an' ef you doan think Ah knows whar you
been spendin' yo' days, you is a fool.  Ah knows you been down ter
dat creeter's house, dat Belle Watling.'"

"Oh, Mammy, no!"

"Yas'm.  Dat whut she said.  An', Miss Melly, it's de truff.
Niggers knows a heap of things quicker dan w'ite folks, an' Ah
knowed dat's whar he been but Ah ain' said nuthin' 'bout it.  An'
he doan deny it.  He say:  'Yas'm, dat's whar Ah been an' you neen
tek on, kase you doan give a damn.  A bawdy house is a haben of
refuge affer dis house of hell.  An' Belle is got one of de worl's
kines' hearts.  She doan th'ow it up ter me dat Ah done kilt mah
chile.'"

"Oh," cried Melanie, stricken to the heart.

Her own life was so pleasant, so sheltered, so wrapped about with
people who loved her, so full of kindness that what Mammy told her
was almost beyond comprehension or belief.  Yet there crawled into
her mind a memory, a picture which she hastily put from her, as she
would put from her the thought of another's nudity.  Rhett had
spoken of Belle Watling the day he cried with his head on her
knees.  But he loved Scarlett.  She could not have been mistaken
that day.  And of course, Scarlett loved him.  What had come
between them?  How could a husband and a wife cut each other to
pieces with such sharp knives?

Mammy took up her story heavily.

"Affer a w'ile, Miss Scarlett come outer de room, w'ite as a sheet
but her jaw set, an' she see me stan'in' dar an' she say:  'De
fune'l be termorrer, Mammy.'  An' she pass me by lak a ghos'.  Den
mah heart tuhn over, kase whut Miss Scarlett say, she mean.  An'
whut Mist' Rhett say, he mean too.  An' he say he kill her ef she
do dat.  Ah wuz plumb 'stracted, Miss Melly, kase Ah done had
sumpin' on mah conscience all de time an' it weighin' me down.
Miss Melly, it wuz me as sceered Lil Miss of de dahk."

"Oh, but Mammy, it doesn't matter--not now."

"Yas'm, it do.  Dat whut de whole trouble.  An' it come ter me Ah
better tell Mist' Rhett even ef he kill me, kase it on mah
conscience.  So Ah slip in de do' real quick, fo' he kin lock it,
an' Ah say:  'Mist' Rhett, Ah's come ter confess.'  An' he swung
roun' on me lak a crazy man an' say:  'Git!'  An', fo' Gawd, Ah
ain' never been so sceered!  But Ah say:  'Please, suh, Mist'
Rhett, let me tell you.  It's 'bout ter kill me.  It wuz me as
sceered Lil Miss of de dahk.'  An' den, Miss Melly, Ah put mah haid
down an' waited fer him ter hit me.  But he din' say nuthin'.  An'
An say:  'Ah din' mean no hahm.  But, Mist' Rhett, dat chile din'
have no caution an' she wuzn' sceered of nuthin'.  An' she wuz
allus gittin' outer baid affer eve'ybody sleep an runnin' roun' de
house barefoot.  An' it worrit me, kase Ah 'fraid she hu't herseff.
So Ah tells her dar's ghos'es an' buggerboos in de dahk.'

"An' den--Miss Melly, you know whut he done?  His face got right
gentle lak an' he come ter me an' put his han' on mah arm.  Dat's
de fust time he ever done dat.  An' he say:  'She wuz so brave,
wuzn' she?  'Cept fer de dahk, she wuzn' sceered of nuthin'.'  An'
wen Ah bust out cryin' he say:  'Now, Mammy,' an' he pat me.  'Now,
Mammy, doan you cahy on so.  Ah's glad you tole me.  Ah knows you
love Miss Bonnie an' kase you love her, it doan matter.  It's whut
de heart is dat matter.'  Well'm dat kinder cheered me up, so Ah
ventu' ter say:  'Mist Rhett, suh, what 'bout de fune'l?'  Den he
tuhn on me lak a wile man an' his eyes glitter an' he say:  'Good
Gawd, Ah thought you'd unnerstan' even ef nobody else din'!  Does
you think Ah'm gwine ter put mah chile away in de dahk w'en she so
sceered of it?  Right now Ah kin hear de way she uster scream w'en
she wake up in de dahk.  Ah ain' gwine have her sceered.'  Miss
Melly, den Ah know he los' his mine.  He drunk an' he need sleep
an' sumpin' ter eat but dat ain' all.  He plumb crazy.  He jes'
push me outer de do' an' say: 'Git de hell outer hyah!'

"Ah goes downstairs an' Ah gits ter thinkin' dat he say dar ain'
gwine be no fune'l an' Miss Scarlett say it be termorrer mawnin'
an' he say dar be shootin'.  An' all de kin-folks in de house an'
all de neighbors already gabblin' 'bout it lak a flock of guinea
hens, an' Ah thought of you, Miss Melly.  You got ter come he'p
us."

"Oh, Mammy, I couldn't intrude!"

"Ef you kain, who kin?"

"But what could I do, Mammy?"

"Miss Melly, Ah doan know.  But you kin do sumpin'.  You kin talk
ter Mist' Rhett an' maybe he lissen ter you.  He set a gret sto' by
you, Miss Melly.  Maybe you doan know it, but he do.  Ah done hear
him say time an' agin, you is de onlies' gret lady he knows."

"But--"

Melanie rose to her feet, confused, her heart quailing at the
thought of confronting Rhett.  The thought of arguing with a man as
grief crazed as the one Mammy depicted made her go cold.  The
thought of entering that brightly lighted room where lay the little
girl she loved so much wrung her heart.  What could she do?  What
could she say to Rhett that would ease his grief and bring him back
to reason?  For a moment she stood irresolute and through the
closed door came the sound of her boy's treble laughter.  Like a
cold knife in her heart came the thought of him dead.  Suppose her
Beau were lying upstairs, his little body cold and still, his merry
laughter hushed.

"Oh," she cried aloud, in fright, and in her mind she clutched him
close to her heart.  She knew how Rhett felt.  If Beau were dead,
how could she put him away, alone with the wind and the rain and
the darkness?

"Oh!  Poor, poor Captain Butler!" she cried.  "I'll go to him now,
right away."

She sped back to the dining room, said a few soft words to Ashley
and surprised her little boy by hugging him close to her and
kissing his blond curls passionately.

She left the house without a hat, her dinner napkin still clutched
in her hand, and the pace she set was hard for Mammy's old legs.
Once in Scarlett's front hall, she bowed briefly to the gathering
in the library, to the frightened Miss Pittypat, the stately old
Mrs. Butler, Will and Suellen.  She went up the stairs swiftly,
with Mammy panting behind her.  For a moment, she paused before
Scarlett's closed door but Mammy hissed, "No'm, doan do dat."

Down the hall Melly went, more slowly now, and stopped in front of
Rhett's room.  She stood irresolutely for a moment as though she
longed to take flight.  Then, bracing herself, like a small soldier
going into battle, she knocked on the door and called softly:
"Please let me in, Captain Butler.  It's Mrs. Wilkes.  I want to
see Bonnie."

The door opened quickly and Mammy, shrinking back into the shadows
of the hall, saw Rhett huge and dark against the blazing background
of candles.  He was swaying on his feet and Mammy could smell the
whisky on his breath.  He looked down at Melly for a moment and
then, taking her by the arm, he pulled her into the room and shut
the door.

Mammy edged herself stealthily to a chair beside the door and sank
into it wearily, her shapeless body overflowing it.  She sat still,
weeping silently and praying.  Now and then she lifted the hem of
her dress and wiped her eyes.  Strain her ears as hard as she
might, she could hear no words from the room, only a low broken
humming sound.

Alter an interminable period, the door cracked open and Melly's
face white and strained, appeared.

"Bring me a pot of coffee, quickly, and some sandwiches."

When the devil drove, Mammy could be as swift as a lithe black
sixteen-year-old and her curiosity to get into Rhett's room made
her work faster.  But her hope turned to disappointment when Melly
merely opened the door a crack and took the tray.  For a long time
Mammy strained her sharp ears but she could distinguish nothing
except the clatter of silver on china, and the muffled soft tones
of Melanie's voice.  Then she heard the creaking of the bed as a
heavy body fell upon it and, soon after, the sound of boots
dropping to the floor.  After an interval, Melanie appeared in the
doorway but, strive though she might, Mammy could not see past her
into the room.  Melanie looked tired and there were tears
glistening on her lashes but her face was serene again.

"Go tell Miss Scarlett that Captain Butler is quite willing for the
funeral to take place tomorrow morning," she whispered.

"Bress Gawd!" ejaculated Mammy.  "How on uth--"

"Don't talk so loud.  He's going to sleep.  And, Mammy, tell Miss
Scarlett, too, that I'll be here all night and you bring me some
coffee.  Bring it here."

"Ter disyere room?"

"Yes, I promised Captain Butler that if he would go to sleep I
would sit up by her all night.  Now go tell Miss Scarlett, so she
won't worry any more."

Mammy started off down the hall, her weight shaking the floor, her
relieved heart singing "Halleluja!  Hallelujah!"  She paused
thoughtfully outside of Scarlett's door, her mind in a ferment of
thankfulness and curiosity.

"How Miss Melley done it beyon' me.  De angels fight on her side,
Ah specs.  Ah'll tell Miss Scarlett de fune'l termorrer but Ah
specs Ah better keep hid dat Miss Melly settin' up wid Lil Miss.
Miss Scarlett ain' gwine lak dat a-tall."



CHAPTER LX


Something was wrong with the world, a somber, frightening wrongness
that pervaded everything like a dark impenetrable mist, stealthily
closing around Scarlett.  This wrongness went even deeper than
Bonnie's death, for now the first unbearable anguish was fading
into resigned acceptance of her loss.  Yet this eerie sense of
disaster to come persisted, as though something black and hooded
stood just at her shoulder, as though the ground beneath her feet
might turn to quicksand as she trod upon it.

She had never before known this type of fear.  All her life her
feet had been firmly planted in common sense and the only things
she had ever feared had been the things she could see, injury,
hunger, poverty, loss of Ashley's love.  Unanalytical she was
trying to analyze now and with no success.  She had lost her
dearest child but she could stand that, somehow, as she had stood
other crushing losses.  She had her health, she had as much money
as she could wish and she still had Ashley, though she saw less and
less of him these days.  Even the constraint which had been between
them since the day of Melanie's ill-starred surprise party did not
worry her, for she knew it would pass.  No, her fear was not of
pain or hunger or loss of love.  Those fears had never weighed her
down as this feeling of wrongness was doing--this blighting fear
that was oddly like that which she knew in her old nightmare, a
thick, swimming mist through which she ran with bursting heart, a
lost child seeking a haven that was hidden from her.

She remembered how Rhett had always been able to laugh her out of
her fears.  She remembered the comfort of his broad brown chest and
his strong arms.  And so she turned to him with eyes that really
saw him for the first time in weeks.  And the change she saw
shocked her.  This man was not going to laugh, nor was he going to
comfort her.

For some time after Bonnie's death she had been too angry with him,
too preoccupied with her own grief to do more than speak politely
in front of the servants.  She had been too busy remembering the
swift running patter of Bonnie's feet and her bubbling laugh to
think that he, too, might be remembering and with pain even greater
than her own.  Throughout these weeks they had met and spoken as
courteously as strangers meeting in the impersonal walls of a
hotel, sharing the same roof, the same table, but never sharing the
thoughts of each other.

Now that she was frightened and lonely, she would have broken
through this barrier if she could, but she found that he was
holding her at arm's length, as though he wished to have no words
with her that went beneath the surface.  Now that her anger was
fading she wanted to tell him that she held him guiltless of
Bonnie's death.  She wanted to cry in his arms and say that she,
too, had been overly proud of the child's horsemanship, overly
indulgent to her wheedlings.  Now she would willingly have humbled
herself and admitted that she had only hurled that accusation at
him out of her misery, hoping by hurting him to alleviate her own
hurt.  But there never seemed an opportune moment.  He looked at
her out of black blank eyes that made no opportunity for her to
speak.  And apologies, once postponed, became harder and harder to
make, and finally impossible.

She wondered why this should be.  Rhett was her husband and between
them there was the unbreakable bond of two people who have shared
the same bed, begotten and borne a loved child and seen that child,
too soon, laid away in the dark.  Only in the arms of the father of
that child could she find comfort, in the exchange of memories and
grief that might hurt at first but would help to heal.  But, now,
as matters stood between them, she would as soon go to the arms of
a complete stranger.

He was seldom at home.  When they did sit down to supper together,
he was usually drunk.  He was not drinking as he had formerly,
becoming increasingly more polished and biting as the liquor took
hold of him, saying amusing, malicious things that made her laugh
in spite of herself.  Now he was silently, morosely drunk and, as
the evenings progressed, soddenly drunk.  Sometimes, in the early
hours of the dawn, she heard him ride into the back yard and beat
on the door of the servants' house so that Pork might help him up
the back stairs and put him to bed.  Put him to bed!  Rhett who had
always drunk others under the table without turning a hair and then
put them to bed.

He was untidy now, where once he had been well groomed, and it took
all Pork's scandalized arguing even to make him change his linen
before supper.  Whisky was showing in his face and the hard line of
his long jaw was being obscured under an unhealthy bloat and puffs
rising under his bloodshot eyes.  His big body with its hard
swelling muscles looked soft and slack and his waist line began to
thicken.

Often he did not come home at all or even send word that he would
be away overnight.  Of course, he might be snoring drunkenly in
some room above a saloon, but Scarlett always believed that he was
at Belle Watling's house on these occasions.  Once she had seen
Belle in a store, a coarse overblown woman now, with most of her
good looks gone.  But, for all her paint and flashy clothes, she
was buxom and almost motherly looking.  Instead of dropping her
eyes or glaring defiantly, as did other light women when confronted
by ladies, Belle gave her stare for stare, searching her face with
an intent, almost pitying look that brought a flush to Scarlett's
cheek.

But she could not accuse him now, could not rage at him, demand
fidelity or try to shame him, any more than she could bring herself
to apologize for accusing him of Bonnie's death.  She was clutched
by a bewildered apathy, an unhappiness that she could not
understand, an unhappiness that went deeper than anything she had
ever known.  She was lonely and she could never remember being so
lonely before.  Perhaps she had never had the time to be very
lonely until now.  She was lonely and afraid and there was no one
to whom she could turn, no one except Melanie.  For now, even
Mammy, her mainstay, had gone back to Tara.  Gone permanently.

Mammy gave no explanation for her departure.  Her tired old eyes
looked sadly at Scarlett when she asked for the train fare home.
To Scarlett's tears and pleading that she stay, Mammy only
answered:  "Look ter me lak Miss Ellen say ter me:  'Mammy, come
home.  Yo' wuk done finish.'  So Ah's gwine home."

Rhett, who had listened to the talk, gave Mammy the money and
patted her arm.

"You're right, Mammy.  Miss Ellen is right.  Your work here is
done.  Go home.  Let me know if you ever need anything."  And as
Scarlett broke into renewed indignant commands:  "Hush, you fool!
Let her go!  Why should anyone want to stay in this house--now?"

There was such a savage bright glitter in his eyes when he spoke
that Scarlett shrank from him, frightened.

"Dr. Meade, do you think he can--can have lost his mind?" she
questioned afterwards, driven to the doctor by her own sense of
helplessness.

"No," said the doctor, "but he's drinking like a fish and will kill
himself if he keeps it up.  He loved the child, Scarlett, and I
guess he drinks to forget about her.  Now, my advice to you, Miss,
is to give him another baby just as quickly as you can."

"Hah!" thought Scarlett bitterly, as she left his office.  That was
easier said than done.  She would gladly have another child,
several children, if they would take that look out of Rhett's eyes
and fill up the aching spaces in her own heart.  A boy who had
Rhett's dark handsomeness and another little girl.  Oh, for another
girl, pretty and gay and willful and full of laughter, not like the
giddy-brained Ella.  Why, oh, why couldn't God have taken Ella if
He had to take one of her children?  Ella was no comfort to her,
now that Bonnie was gone.  But Rhett did not seem to want any other
children.  At least he never came to her bedroom though now the
door was never locked and usually invitingly ajar.  He did not seem
to care.  He did not seem to care for anything now except whisky
and that blowzy red-haired woman.

He was bitter now, where he had been pleasantly jeering, brutal
where his thrusts had once been tempered with humor.  After Bonnie
died, many of the good ladies of the neighborhood who had been won
over to him by his charming manners with his daughter were anxious
to show him kindness.  They stopped him on the street to give him
their sympathy and spoke to him from over their hedges, saying that
they understood.  But now that Bonnie, the reason for his good
manners, was gone the manners went to.  He cut the ladies and their
well-meant condolences off shortly, rudely.

But, oddly enough, the ladies were not offended.  They understood,
or thought they understood.  When he rode home in the twilight
almost too drunk to stay in the saddle, scowling at those who spoke
to him, the ladies said "Poor thing!" and redoubled their efforts
to be kind and gentle.  They felt very sorry for him, broken
hearted and riding home to no better comfort than Scarlett.

Everybody knew how cold and heartless she was.  Everybody was
appalled at the seeming ease with which she had recovered from
Bonnie's death, never realizing or caring to realize the effort
that lay behind that seeming recovery.  Rhett had the town's
tenderest sympathy and he neither knew nor cared.  Scarlett had the
town's dislike and, for once, she would have welcomed the sympathy
of old friends.

Now, none of her old friends came to the house, except Aunt Pitty,
Melanie and Ashley.  Only the new friends came calling in their
shining carriages, anxious to tell her of their sympathy, eager to
divert her with gossip about other new friends in whom she was not
at all interested.  All these "new people," strangers, every one!
They didn't know her.  They would never know her.  They had no
realization of what her life had been before she reached her
present safe eminence in her mansion on Peachtree Street.  They
didn't care to talk about what their lives had been before they
attained stiff brocades and victorias with fine teams of horses.
They didn't know of her struggles, her privations, all the things
that made this great house and pretty clothes and silver and
receptions worth having.  They didn't know.  They didn't care,
these people from God-knows-where who seemed to live always on the
surface of things, who had no common memories of war and hunger and
fighting, who had no common roots going down into the same red
earth.

Now in her loneliness, she would have liked to while away the
afternoons with Maybelle or Fanny or Mrs. Elsing or Mrs. Whiting or
even that redoubtable old warrior, Mrs. Merriwether.  Or Mrs.
Bonnell or--or any of her old friends and neighbors.  For they
knew.  They had known war and terror and fire, had seen dear ones
dead before their time; they had hungered and been ragged, had
lived with the wolf at the door.  And they had rebuilt fortune from
ruin.

It would be a comfort to sit with Maybelle, remembering that
Maybelle had buried a baby, dead in the mad flight before Sherman.
There would be solace in Fanny's presence, knowing that she and
Fanny both had lost husbands in the black days of martial law.  It
would be grim fun to laugh with Mrs. Elsing, recalling the old
lady's face as she flogged her horse through Five Points the day
Atlanta fell, her loot from the commissary jouncing from her
carriage.  It would be pleasant to match stories with Mrs.
Merriwether, now secure on the proceeds of her bakery, pleasant to
say:  "Do you remember how bad things were right after the
surrender?  Do you remember when we didn't know where our next pair
of shoes was coming from?  And look at us now!"

Yes, it would be pleasant.  Now she understood why when two ex-
Confederates met, they talked of the war with so much relish, with
pride, with nostalgia.  Those had been days that tried their hearts
but they had come through them.  They were veterans.  She was a
veteran too, but she had no cronies with whom she could refight old
battles.  Oh, to be with her own kind of people again, those people
who had been through the same things and knew how they hurt--and
yet how great a part of you they were!

But, somehow, these people had slipped away.  She realized that it
was her own fault.  She had never cared until now--now that Bonnie
was dead and she was lonely and afraid and she saw across her
shining dinner table a swarthy sodden stranger disintegrating under
her eyes.



CHAPTER LXI


Scarlett was in Marietta when Rhett's urgent telegram came.  There
was a train leaving for Atlanta in ten minutes and she caught it,
carrying no baggage except her reticule and leaving Wade and Ella
at the hotel with Prissy.

Atlanta was only twenty miles away but the train crawled
interminably through the wet early autumn afternoon, stopping at
every bypath for passengers.  Panic stricken at Rhett's message,
mad for speed, Scarlett almost screamed at every halt.  Down the
road lumbered the train through forests faintly, tiredly gold, past
red hillsides still scarred with serpentine breastworks, past old
battery emplacements and weed-grown craters, down the road over
which Johnston's men had retreated so bitterly, fighting every step
of the way.  Each station, each crossroad the conductor called was
the name of a battle, the site of a skirmish.  Once they would have
stirred Scarlett to memories of terror but now she had no thought
for them.

Rhett's message had been:

"Mrs. Wilkes ill.  Come home immediately."

Twilight had fallen when the train pulled into Atlanta and a light
misting rain obscured the town.  The gas street lamps glowed dully,
blobs of yellow in the fog.  Rhett was waiting for her at the depot
with the carriage.  The very sight of his face frightened her more
than his telegram.  She had never seen it so expressionless before.

"She isn't--" she cried.

"No.  She's still alive."  Rhett assisted her into the carriage.
"To Mrs. Wilkes' house and as fast as you can go," he ordered the
coachman.

"What's the matter with her?  I didn't know she was ill.  She
looked all right last week.  Did she have an accident?  Oh, Rhett,
it isn't really as serious as you--"

"She's dying," said Rhett and his voice had no more expression than
his face.  "She wants to see you."

"Not Melly!  Oh, not Melly!  What's happened to her?"

"She's had a miscarriage."

"A--a-mis--but, Rhett, she--" Scarlett floundered.  This
information on top of the horror of his announcement took her
breath away.

"You did not know she was going to have a baby?"

She could not even shake her head.

"Ah, well.  I suppose not.  I don't think she told anyone.  She
wanted it to be a surprise.  But I knew."

"You knew?  But surely she didn't tell you!"

"She didn't have to tell me.  I knew.  She's been so--happy these
last two months I knew it couldn't mean anything else."

"But Rhett, the doctor said it would kill her to have another
baby!"

"It has killed her," said Rhett.  And to the coachman:  "For God's
sake, can't you drive faster?"

"But, Rhett, she can't be dying!  I--I didn't and I--"

"She hasn't your strength.  She's never had any strength.  She's
never had anything but heart."

The carriage rocked to a standstill in front of the flat little
house and Rhett handed her out.  Trembling, frightened, a sudden
feeling of loneliness upon her, she clasped his arm.

"You're coming in, Rhett?"

"No," he said and got back into the carriage.

She flew up the front steps, across the porch and threw open the
door.  There, in the yellow lamplight were Ashley, Aunt Pitty and
India.  Scarlett thought:  "What's India doing here?  Melanie told
her never to set foot in this house again."  The three rose at the
sight of her, Aunt Pitty biting her trembling lips to still them,
India staring at her, grief stricken and without hate.  Ashley
looked dull as a sleepwalker and, as he came to her and put his
hand upon her arm, he spoke like a sleepwalker.

"She asked for you," he said.  "She asked for you."

"Can I see her now?"  She turned toward the closed door of
Melanie's room.

"No.  Dr. Meade is in there now.  I'm glad you've come, Scarlett."

"I came as quickly as I could."  Scarlett shed her bonnet and her
cloak.  "The train--  She isn't really--  Tell me, she's better,
isn't she, Ashley?  Speak to me!  Don't look like that!  She isn't
really--"

"She kept asking for you," said Ashley and looked her in the eyes.
And, in his eyes she saw the answer to her question.  For a moment,
her heart stood still and then a queer fear, stronger than anxiety,
stronger than grief, began to beat in her breast.  It can't be
true, she thought vehemently, trying to push back the fear.
Doctors make mistakes.  I won't think it's true.  I can't let
myself think it's true.  I'll scream if I do.  I must think of
something else.

"I don't believe it!" she cried stormily, looking into the three
drawn faces as though defying them to contradict her.  "And why
didn't Melanie tell me?  I'd never have gone to Marietta if I'd
known!"

Ashley's eyes awoke and were tormented.

"She didn't tell anyone, Scarlett, especially not you.  She was
afraid you'd scold her if you knew.  She wanted to wait three--till
she thought it safe and sure and then surprise you all and laugh
and say how wrong the doctors had been.  And she was so happy.  You
know how she was about babies--how much she's wanted a little girl.
And everything went so well until--and then for no reason at all--"

The door of Melanie's room opened quietly and Dr. Meade came out
into the hall, shutting the door behind him.  He stood for a
moment, his gray beard sunk on his chest, and looked at the
suddenly frozen four.  His gaze fell last on Scarlett.  As he came
toward her, she saw that there was grief in his eyes and also
dislike and contempt that flooded her frightened heart with guilt.

"So you finally got here," he said.

Before she could answer, Ashley started toward the closed door.

"Not you, yet," said the doctor.  "She wants to speak to Scarlett."

"Doctor," said India, putting a hand on his sleeve.  Though her
voice was toneless, it plead more loudly than words.  "Let me see
her for a moment.  I've been here since this morning, waiting, but
she--  Let me see her for a moment.  I want to tell her--must tell
her--that I was wrong about--something."

She did not look at Ashley or Scarlett as she spoke, but Dr. Meade
allowed his cold glance to fall on Scarlett.

"I'll see, Miss India," he said briefly.  "But only if you'll give
me your word not to use up her strength telling her you were wrong.
She knows you were wrong and it will only worry her to hear you
apologize."

Pitty began, timidly:  "Please, Dr. Meade--"

"Miss Pitty, you know you'd scream and faint."

Pitty drew up her stout little body and gave the doctor glance for
glance.  Her eyes were dry and there was dignity in every curve.

"Well, all right, honey, a little later," said the doctor, more
kindly.  "Come, Scarlett."

They tiptoed down the hall to the closed door and the doctor put
his hand on Scarlett's shoulder in a hard grip.

"Now, Miss," he whispered briefly, "no hysterics and no deathbed
confessions from you or, before God, I will wring your neck!  Don't
give me any of your innocent stares.  You know what I mean.  Miss
Melly is going to die easily and you aren't going to ease your own
conscience by telling her anything about Ashley.  I've never harmed
a woman yet, but if you say anything now--you'll answer to me."

He opened the door before she could answer, pushed her into the
room and closed the door behind her.  The little room, cheaply
furnished in black walnut, was in semidarkness, the lamp shaded
with a newspaper.  It was as small and prim a room as a
schoolgirl's, the narrow little low-backed bed, the plain net
curtains looped back, the clean faded rag rugs on the floor, were
so different from the lavishness of Scarlett's own bedroom with its
towering carved furniture, pink brocade draperies and rose-strewn
carpet.

Melanie lay in the bed, her figure under the counterpane shrunken
and flat like a little girl's.  Two black braids fell on either
side of her face and her closed eyes were sunken in twin purple
circles.  At the sight of her Scarlett stood transfixed, leaning
against the door.  Despite the gloom of the room, she could see
that Melanie's face was of a waxy yellow color.  It was drained of
life's blood and there was a pinched look about the nose.  Until
that moment, Scarlett had hoped Dr. Meade was mistaken.  But now
she knew.  In the hospitals during the war she had seen too many
faces wearing this pinched look not to know what it inevitably
presaged.

Melanie was dying, but for a moment Scarlett's mind refused to take
it in.  Melanie could not die.  It was impossible for her to die.
God wouldn't let her die when she, Scarlett, needed her so much.
Never before had it occurred to her that she needed Melanie.  But
now, the truth surged in, down to the deepest recesses of her soul.
She had relied on Melanie, even as she had relied upon herself, and
she had never known it.  Now, Melanie was dying and Scarlett knew
she could not get along without her.  Now, as she tiptoed across
the room toward the quiet figure, panic clutching at her heart, she
knew that Melanie had been her sword and her shield, her comfort
and her strength.

"I must hold her!  I can't let her get away!" she thought and sank
beside the bed with a rustle of skirts.  Hastily she grasped the
limp hand lying on the coverlet and was frightened anew by its
chill.

"It's me, Melly," she said.

Melanie's eyes opened a slit and then, as if having satisfied
herself that it was really Scarlett, she closed them again.  After
a pause she drew a breath and whispered:

"Promise me?"

"Oh, anything!"

"Beau--look after him."

Scarlett could only nod, a strangled feeling in her throat, and she
gently pressed the hand she held by way of assent.

"I give him to you."  There was the faintest trace of a smile.  "I
gave him to you, once before--'member?--before he was born."

Did she remember?  Could she ever forget that time?  Almost as
clearly as if that dreadful day had returned, she could feel the
stifling heat of the September noon, remembering her terror of the
Yankees, hear the tramp of the retreating troops, recall Melanie's
voice begging her to take the baby should she die--remember, too,
how she had hated Melanie that day and hoped that she would die.

"I've killed her," she thought, in superstitious agony.  "I wished
so often she would die and God heard me and is punishing me."

"Oh, Melly, don't talk like that!  You know you'll pull through
this--"

"No.  Promise."

Scarlett gulped.

"You know I promise.  I'll treat him like he was my own boy."

"College?" asked Melanie's faint flat voice.

"Oh, yes!  The university and Harvard and Europe and anything he
wants--and--and--a pony--and music lessons--  Oh, please, Melly, do
try!  Do make an effort!"

The silence fell again and on Melanie's face there were signs of a
struggle to gather strength to speak.

"Ashley," she said.  "Ashley and you--"  Her voice faltered into
stillness.

At the mention of Ashley's name, Scarlett's heart stood still, cold
as granite within her.  Melanie had known all the time.  Scarlett
dropped her head on the coverlet and a sob that would not rise
caught her throat with a cruel hand.  Melanie knew.  Scarlett was
beyond shame now, beyond any feeling save a wild remorse that she
had hurt this gentle creature throughout the long years.  Melanie
had known--and yet, she had remained her loyal friend.  Oh, if she
could only live those years over again!  She would never even let
her eyes meet those of Ashley.

"O God," she prayed rapidly, "do, please, let her live!  I'll make
it up to her.  I'll be so good to her.  I'll never even speak to
Ashley again as long as I live, if You'll only let her get well!"

"Ashley," said Melanie feebly and her fingers reached out to touch
Scarlett's bowed head.  Her thumb and forefinger tugged with no
more strength than that of a baby at Scarlett's hair.  Scarlett
knew what that meant, knew Melanie wanted her to look up.  But she
could not, could not meet Melanie's eyes and read that knowledge in
them.

"Ashley," Melanie whispered again and Scarlett gripped herself.
When she looked God in the face on the Day of Judgment and read her
sentence in His eyes, it would not be as bad as this.  Her soul
cringed but she raised her head.

She saw only the same dark loving eyes, sunken and drowsy with
death, the same tender mouth tiredly fighting pain for breath.  No
reproach was there, no accusation and no fear--only an anxiety that
she might not find strength for words.

For a moment Scarlett was too stunned to even feel relief.  Then,
as she held Melanie's hand more closely, a flood of warm gratitude
to God swept over her and, for the first time since her childhood,
she said a humble, unselfish prayer.

"Thank You, God.  I know I'm not worth it but thank You for not
letting her know."

"What about Ashley, Melly?"

"You'll--look after him?"

"Oh, yes."

"He catches cold--so easily."

There was a pause.

"Look after--his business--you understand?"

"Yes, I understand.  I will."

She made a great effort.

"Ashley isn't--practical."

Only death could have forced that disloyalty from Melanie.

"Look after him, Scarlett--but--don't ever let him know."

"I'll look after him and the business too, and I'll never let him
know.  I'll just kind of suggest things to him."

Melanie managed a small smile but it was a triumphant one as her
eyes met Scarlett's again.  Their glance sealed the bargain that
the protection of Ashley Wilkes from a too harsh world was passing
from one woman to another and that Ashley's masculine pride should
never be humbled by this knowledge.

Now the struggle went out of the tired face as though with
Scarlett's promise, ease had come to her.

"You're so smart--so brave--always been so good to me--"

At these words, the sob came freely to Scarlett's throat and she
clapped her hand over her mouth.  Now, she was going to bawl like a
child and cry out:  "I've been a devil!  I've wronged you so!  I
never did anything for you!  It was all for Ashley."

She rose to her feet abruptly, sinking her teeth into her thumb to
regain her control.  Rhett's words came back to her again, "She
loves you.  Let that be your cross."  Well, the cross was heavier
now.  It was bad enough that she had tried by every art to take
Ashley from her.  But now it was worse that Melanie, who had
trusted her blindly through life, was laying the same love and
trust on her in death.  No, she could not speak.  She could not
even say again:  "Make an effort to live."  She must let her go
easily, without a struggle, without tears, without sorrow.

The door opened slightly and Dr. Meade stood on the threshold,
beckoning imperiously.  Scarlett bent over the bed, choking back
her tears and taking Melanie's hand, laid it against her cheek.

"Good night," she said, and her voice was steadier than she thought
it possibly could be.

"Promise me--" came the whisper, very softly now.

"Anything, darling."

"Captain Butler--be kind to him.  He--loves you so."

"Rhett?" thought Scarlett, bewildered, and the words meant nothing
to her.

"Yes, indeed," she said automatically and, pressing a light kiss on
the hand, laid it back on the bed.

"Tell the ladies to come in immediately," whispered the doctor as
she passed through the door.

Through blurred eyes she saw India and Pitty follow the doctor into
the room, holding their skirts close to their sides to keep them
from rustling.  The door closed behind them and the house was
still.  Ashley was nowhere to be seen.  Scarlett leaned her head
against the wall, like a naughty child in a corner, and rubbed her
aching throat.

Behind that door, Melanie was going and, with her, the strength
upon which she had relied unknowingly for so many years.  Why, oh,
why, had she not realized before this how much she loved and needed
Melanie?  But who would have thought of small plain Melanie as a
tower of strength?  Melanie who was shy to tears before strangers,
timid about raising her voice in an opinion of her own, fearful of
the disapproval of old ladies, Melanie who lacked the courage to
say Boo to a goose?  And yet--

Scarlett's mind went back through the years to the still, hot noon
at Tara when gray smoke curled above a blue-clad body and Melanie
stood at the top of the stairs with Charles' saber in her hand.
Scarlett remembered that she had thought at the time:  "How silly!
Melly couldn't even heft that sword!"  But now she knew that had
the necessity arisen, Melanie would have charged down those stairs
and killed the Yankee--or been killed herself.

Yes, Melanie had been there that day with a sword in her small
hand, ready to do battle for her.  And now, as Scarlett looked
sadly back, she realized that Melanie had always been there beside
her with a sword in her hand, unobtrusive as her own shadow, loving
her, fighting for her with blind passionate loyalty, fighting
Yankees, fire, hunger, poverty, public opinion and even her beloved
blood kin.

Scarlett felt her courage and self-confidence ooze from her as she
realized that the sword which had flashed between her and the world
was sheathed forever.

"Melly is the only woman friend I ever had," she thought forlornly,
"the only woman except Mother who really loved me.  She's like
Mother, too.  Everyone who knew her has clung to her skirts."

Suddenly it was as if Ellen were lying behind that closed door,
leaving the world for a second time.  Suddenly she was standing at
Tara again with the world about her ears, desolate with the
knowledge that she could not face life without the terrible
strength of the weak, the gentle, the tender hearted.



She stood in the hall, irresolute, frightened, and the glaring
light of the fire in the sitting room threw tall dim shadows on the
walls about her.  The house was utterly still and the stillness
soaked into her like a fine chill rain.  Ashley!  Where was Ashley?

She went toward the sitting room seeking him like a cold animal
seeking the fire but he was not there.  She must find him.  She had
discovered Melanie's strength and her dependence on it only to lose
it in the moment of discovery but there was still Ashley left.
There was Ashley who was strong and wise and comforting.  In Ashley
and his love lay strength upon which to lay her weakness, courage
to bolster her fear, ease for her sorrow.

He must be in his room, she thought, and tiptoeing down the hall,
she knocked softly.  There was no answer, so she pushed the door
open.  Ashley was standing in front of the dresser, looking at a
pair of Melanie's mended gloves.  First he picked up one and looked
at it, as though he had never seen it before.  Then he laid it down
gently, as though it were made of glass, and picked up the other
one.

She said:  "Ashley!" in a trembling voice and he turned slowly and
looked at her.  The drowsy aloofness had gone from his gray eyes
and they were wide and unmasked.  In them she saw fear that matched
her own fear, helplessness weaker than her own, bewilderment more
profound than she would ever know.  The feeling of dread which had
possessed her in the hall deepened as she saw his face.  She went
toward him.

"I'm frightened," she said.  "Oh, Ashley, hold me.  I'm so
frightened!"

He made no move to her but stared, gripping the glove tightly in
both hands.  She put a hand on his arm and whispered:  "What is
it?"

His eyes searched her intently, hunting, hunting desperately for
something he did not find.  Finally he spoke and his voice was not
his own.

"I was wanting you," he said.  "I was going to run and find you--
run like a child wanting comfort--and I find a child, more
frightened, running to me."

"Not you--you can't be frightened," she cried.  "Nothing has ever
frightened you.  But I--  You've always been so strong--"

"If I've ever been strong, it was because she was behind me," he
said, his voice breaking, and he looked down at the glove and
smoothed the fingers.  "And--and--all the strength I ever had is
going with her."

There was such a note of wild despair in his low voice that she
dropped her hand from his arm and stepped back.  And in the heavy
silence that fell between them, she felt that she really understood
him for the first time in her life.

"Why--" she said slowly, "why, Ashley, you love her, don't you?"

He spoke as with an effort.

"She is the only dream I ever had that lived and breathed and did
not die in the face of reality."

"Dreams!" she thought, an old irritation stirring.  "Always dreams
with him!  Never common sense!"

With a heart that was heavy and a little bitter, she said:  "You've
been such a fool, Ashley.  Why couldn't you see that she was worth
a million of me?"

"Scarlett, please!  If you only knew what I've gone through since
the doctor--"

"What you've gone through!  Don't you think that I--  Oh, Ashley,
you should have known, years ago, that you loved her and not me!
Why didn't you!  Everything would have been so different, so--  Oh,
you should have realized and not kept me dangling with all your
talk about honor and sacrifice!  If you'd told me, years ago, I'd
have--  It would have killed me but I could have stood it somehow.
But you wait till now, till Melly's dying, to find it out and now
it's too late to do anything.  Oh, Ashley, men are supposed to know
such things--not women!  You should have seen so clearly that you
loved her all the time and only wanted me like--like Rhett wants
that Watling woman!"

He winced at her words but his eyes still met hers, imploring
silence, comfort.  Every line of his face admitted the truth of her
words.  The very droop of his shoulders showed that his own self-
castigation was more cruel than any she could give.  He stood
silent before her, clutching the glove as though it were an
understanding hand and, in the stillness that followed her words,
her indignation fell away and pity, tinged with contempt, took its
place.  Her conscience smote her.  She was kicking a beaten and
defenseless man--and she had promised Melanie that she would look
after him.

"And just as soon as I promised her, I said mean, hurting things to
him and there's no need for me to say them or for anyone to say
them.  He knows the truth and it's killing him," she thought
desolately.  "He's not grown up.  He's a child, like me, and he's
sick with fear at losing her.  Melly knew how it would be--Melly
knew him far better than I do.  That's why she said look after him
and Beau, in the same breath.  How can Ashley ever stand this?  I
can stand it.  I can stand anything.  I've had to stand so much.
But he can't--he can't stand anything without her."

"Forgive me, darling," she said gently, putting out her arms.  "I
know what you must be suffering.  But remember, she doesn't know
anything--she never even suspected--  God was that good to us."

He came to her quickly and his arms went round her blindly.  She
tiptoed to bring her warm cheek comfortingly against his and with
one hand she smoothed the back of his hair.

"Don't cry, sweet.  She'd want you to be brave.  She'll want to see
you in a moment and you must be brave.  She mustn't see that you've
been crying.  It would worry her."

He held her in a grip that made breathing difficult and his choking
voice was in her ear.

"What will I do?  I can't--I can't live without her!"

"I can't either," she thought, shuddering away from the picture of
the long years to come, without Melanie.  But she caught herself in
a strong grasp.  Ashley was depending on her, Melanie was depending
on her.  As once before, in the moonlight at Tara, drunk, exhausted,
she had thought:  "Burdens are for shoulders strong enough to carry
them."  Well, her shoulders were strong and Ashley's were not.  She
squared her shoulders for the load and with a calmness she was far
from feeling, kissed his wet cheek without fever or longing or
passion, only with cool gentleness.

"We shall manage--somehow," she said.

A door opened with sudden violence into the hall and Dr. Meade
called with sharp urgency:

"Ashley!  Quick!"

"My God!  She's gone!" thought Scarlett.  "And Ashley didn't get to
tell her good-by!  But maybe--"

"Hurry!" she cried aloud, giving him a push, for he stood staring
like one stunned.  "Hurry!"

She pulled open the door and motioned him through.  Galvanized by
her words, he ran into the hall, the glove still clasped closely in
his hand.  She heard his rapid steps for a moment and then the
closing of a door.

She said, "My God!" again and walking slowly to the bed, sat down
upon it and dropped her head in her hands.  She was suddenly tired,
more tired than she had ever been in all her life.  With the sound
of the closing door, the strain under which she had been laboring,
the strain which had given her strength, suddenly snapped.  She
felt exhausted in body and drained of emotions.  Now she felt no
sorrow or remorse, no fear or amazement.  She was tired and her
mind ticked away dully, mechanically, as the clock on the mantel.

Out of the dullness, one thought arose.  Ashley did not love her
and had never really loved her and the knowledge did not hurt.  It
should hurt.  She should be desolate, broken hearted, ready to
scream at fate.  She had relied upon his love for so long.  It had
upheld her through so many dark places.  Yet, there the truth was.
He did not love her and she did not care.  She did not care because
she did not love him.  She did not love him and so nothing he could
do or say could hurt her.

She lay down on the bed and put her head on the pillow tiredly.
Useless to try to combat the idea, useless to say to herself:  "But
I do love him.  I've loved him for years.  Love can't change to
apathy in a minute."

But it could change and it had changed.

"He never really existed at all, except in my imagination," she
thought wearily.  "I loved something I made up, something that's
just as dead as Melly is.  I made a pretty suit of clothes and fell
in love with it.  And when Ashley came riding along, so handsome,
so different, I put that suit on him and made him wear it whether
it fitted him or not.  And I wouldn't see what he really was.  I
kept on loving the pretty clothes--and not him at all."

Now she could look back down the long years and see herself in
green flowered dimity, standing in the sunshine at Tara, thrilled
by the young horseman with his blond hair shining like a silver
helmet.  She could see so clearly now that he was only a childish
fancy, no more important really than her spoiled desire for the
aquamarine earbobs she had coaxed out of Gerald.  For, once she
owned the earbobs, they had lost their value, as everything except
money lost its value once it was hers.  And so he, too, would have
become cheap if, in those first far-away days, she had ever had the
satisfaction of refusing to marry him.  If she had ever had him at
her mercy, seen him grown passionate, importunate, jealous, sulky,
pleading, like the other boys, the wild infatuation which had
possessed her would have passed, blowing away as lightly as mist
before sunshine and light wind when she met a new man.

"What a fool I've been," she thought bitterly.  "And now I've got
to pay for it.  What I've wished for so often has happened.  I've
wished Melly was dead so I could have him.  And now she's dead and
I've got him and I don't want him.  His damned honor will make him
ask me if I want to divorce Rhett and marry him.  Marry him?  I
wouldn't have him on a silver platter!  But, just the same I've got
him round my neck for the rest of my life.  As long as I live I'll
have to look after him and see that he doesn't starve and that
people don't hurt his feelings.  He'll be just another child,
clinging to my skirts.  I've lost my lover and I've got another
child.  And if I hadn't promised Melly, I'd--I wouldn't care if I
never saw him again."



CHAPTER LXII


She heard whispering voices outside, and going to the door she saw
the frightened negroes standing in the back hall, Dilcey with her
arms sagging under the heavy weight of the sleeping Beau, Uncle
Peter crying, and Cookie wiping her wide wet face on her apron.
All three looked at her, dumbly asking what they were to do now.
She looked up the hall toward the sitting room and saw India and
Aunt Pitty standing speechless, holding each other's hands and, for
once, India had lost her stiff-necked look.  Like the negroes, they
looked imploringly at her, expecting her to give instructions.  She
walked into the sitting room and the two women closed about her.

"Oh, Scarlett, what--" began Aunt Pitty, her fat, child's mouth
shaking.

"Don't speak to me or I'll scream," said Scarlett.  Overwrought
nerves brought sharpness to her voice and her hands clenched at her
sides.  The thought of speaking of Melanie now, of making the
inevitable arrangements that follow a death made her throat
tighten.  "I don't want a word out of either of you."

At the authoritative note in her voice, they fell back, helpless
hurt looks on their faces.  "I mustn't cry in front of them," she
thought.  "I mustn't break now or they'll begin crying too, and
then the darkies will begin screaming and we'll all go mad.  I must
pull myself together.  There's so much I'll have to do.  See the
undertaker and arrange the funeral and see that the house is clean
and be here to talk to people who'll cry on my neck.  Ashley can't
do them.  I've got to do them.  Oh, what a weary load!  It's always
been a weary load and always some one else's load!"

She looked at the dazed hurt faces of India and Pitty and
contrition swept her.  Melanie would not like her to be so sharp
with those who loved her.

"I'm sorry I was cross," she said, speaking with difficulty.  "It's
just that I--I'm sorry I was cross, Auntie.  I'm going out on the
porch for a minute.  I've got to be alone.  Then I'll come back and
we'll--"

She patted Aunt Pitty and went swiftly by her to the front door,
knowing if she stayed in this room another minute her control would
crack.  She had to be alone.  And she had to cry or her heart would
break.

She stepped onto the dark porch and closed the door behind her and
the moist night air was cool upon her face.  The rain had ceased
and there was no sound except for the occasional drip of water from
the eaves.  The world was wrapped in a thick mist, a faintly chill
mist that bore on its breath the smell of the dying year.  All the
houses across the street were dark except one, and the light from a
lamp in the window, falling into the street, struggled feebly with
the fog, golden particles floating in its rays.  It was as if the
whole world were enveloped in an unmoving blanket of gray smoke.
And the whole world was still.

She leaned her head against one of the uprights of the porch and
prepared to cry but no tears came.  This was a calamity too deep
for tears.  Her body shook.  There still reverberated in her mind
the crashes of the two impregnable citadels of her life, thundering
to dust about her ears.  She stood for a while, trying to summon up
her old charm:  "I'll think of all this tomorrow when I can stand
it better."  But the charm had lost its potency.  She had to think
of two things, now--Melanie and how much she loved and needed her;
Ashley and the obstinate blindness that had made her refuse to see
him as he really was.  And she knew that thoughts of them would
hurt just as much tomorrow and all the tomorrows of her life.

"I can't go back in there and talk to them now," she thought.  "I
can't face Ashley tonight and comfort him.  Not tonight!  Tomorrow
morning I'll come early and do the things I must do, say the
comforting things I must say.  But not tonight.  I can't.  I'm
going home."

Home was only five blocks away.  She would not wait for the sobbing
Peter to harness the buggy, would not wait for Dr. Meade to drive
her home.  She could not endure the tears of the one, the silent
condemnation of the other.  She went swiftly down the dark front
steps without her coat or bonnet and into the misty night.  She
rounded the corner and started up the long hill toward Peachree
Street, walking in a still wet world, and even her footsteps were
as noiseless as a dream.

As she went up the hill, her chest tight with tears that would not
come, there crept over her an unreal feeling, a feeling that she
had been in this same dim chill place before, under a like set of
circumstances--not once but many times before.  How silly, she
thought uneasily, quickening her steps.  Her nerves were playing
her tricks.  But the feeling persisted, stealthily pervading her
mind.  She peered about her uncertainly and the feeling grew, eerie
but familiar, and her head went up sharply like an animal scenting
danger.  It's just that I'm worn out, she tried to soothe herself.
And the night's so queer, so misty.  I never saw such thick mist
before except--except!

And then she knew and fear squeezed her heart.  She knew now.  In a
hundred nightmares, she had fled through fog like this, through a
haunted country without landmarks, thick with cold cloaking mist,
peopled with clutching ghosts and shadows.  Was she dreaming again
or was this her dream come true?

For an instant, reality went out of her and she was lost.  The old
nightmare feeling was sweeping her, stronger than ever, and her
heart began to race.  She was standing again amid death and
stillness, even as she had once stood at Tara.  All that mattered
in the world had gone out of it, life was in ruins and panic howled
through her heart like a cold wind.  The horror that was in the
mist and was the mist laid hands upon her.  And she began to run.
As she had run a hundred times in dreams, she ran now, flying
blindly she knew not where, driven by a nameless dread, seeking in
the gray mist for the safety that lay somewhere.

Up the dim street she fled, her head down, her heart hammering, the
night air wet on her lips, the trees overhead menacing.  Somewhere,
somewhere in this wild land of moist stillness, there was a refuge!
She sped gasping up the long hill, her wet skirts wrapping coldly
about her ankles, her lungs bursting, the tight-laced stays
pressing her ribs into her heart.

Then before her eyes there loomed a light, a row of lights, dim and
flickering but none the less real.  In her nightmare, there had
never been any lights, only gray fog.  Her mind seized on those
lights.  Lights meant safety, people, reality.  Suddenly she
stopped running, her hands clenching, struggling to pull herself
out of her panic, staring intently at the row of gas lamps which
had signaled to her brain that this was Peachtree Street, Atlanta,
and not the gray world of sleep and ghosts.

She sank down panting on a carriage block, clutching at her nerves
as though they were ropes slipping swiftly through her hands.

"I was running--running like a crazy person!" she thought, her body
shaking with lessening fear, her thudding heart making her sick.
"But where was I running?"

Her breath came more easily now and she sat with her hand pressed
to her side and looked up Peachtree Street.  There, at the top of
the hill, was her own house.  It looked as though every window bore
lights, lights defying the mist to dim their brilliance.  Home!  It
was real!  She looked at the dim far-off bulk of the house
thankfully, longingly, and something like calm fell on her spirit.

Home!  That was where she wanted to go.  That was where she was
running.  Home to Rhett!

At this realization it was as though chains fell away from her and
with them the fear which had haunted her dreams since the night she
stumbled to Tara to find the world ended.  At the end of the road
to Tara she had found security gone, all strength, all wisdom, all
loving tenderness, all understanding gone--all those things which,
embodied in Ellen, had been the bulwark of her girlhood.  And,
though she had won material safety since that night, in her dreams
she was still a frightened child, searching for the lost security
of that lost world.

Now she knew the haven she had sought in dreams, the place of warm
safety which had always been hidden from her in the mist.  It was
not Ashley--oh, never Ashley!  There was no more warmth in him than
in a marsh light, no more security than in quicksand.  It was
Rhett--Rhett who had strong arms to hold her, a broad chest to
pillow her tired head, jeering laughter to pull her affairs into
proper perspective.  And complete understanding, because he, like
her, saw truth as truth, unobstructed by impractical notions of
honor, sacrifice, or high belief in human nature.  He loved her!
Why hadn't she realized that he loved her, for all his taunting
remarks to the contrary?  Melanie had seen it and with her last
breath had said, "Be kind to him."

"Oh," she thought, "Ashley's not the only stupidly blind person.  I
should have seen."

For years she had had her back against the stone wall of Rhett's
love and had taken it as much for granted as she had taken
Melanie's love, flattering herself that she drew her strength from
herself alone.  And even as she had realized earlier in the evening
that Melanie had been beside her in her bitter campaigns against
life, now she knew that silent in the background, Rhett had stood,
loving her, understanding her, ready to help.  Rhett at the bazaar,
reading her impatience in her eyes and leading her out in the reel,
Rhett helping her out of the bondage of mourning, Rhett convoying
her through the fire and explosions the night Atlanta fell, Rhett
lending her the money that gave her her start, Rhett who comforted
her when she woke in the nights crying with fright from her dreams--
why, no man did such things without loving a woman to distraction!

The trees dripped dampness upon her but she did not feel it.  The
mist swirled about her and she paid it no heed.  For when she
thought of Rhett, with his swarthy face, flashing teeth and dark
alert eyes, a trembling came over her.

"I love him," she thought and, as always, she accepted the truth
with little wonder, as a child accepting a gift.  "I don't know how
long I've loved him but it's true.  And if it hadn't been for
Ashley, I'd have realized it long ago.  I've never been able to see
the world at all, because Ashley stood in the way."

She loved him, scamp, blackguard, without scruple or honor--at
least, honor as Ashley saw it.  "Damn Ashley's honor!" she thought.
"Ashley's honor has always let me down.  Yes, from the very
beginning when he kept on coming to see me, even though he knew his
family expected him to marry Melanie.  Rhett has never let me down,
even that dreadful night of Melly's reception when he ought to have
wrung my neck.  Even when he left me on the road the night Atlanta
fell, he knew I'd be safe.  He knew I'd get through somehow.  Even
when he acted like he was going to make me pay to get that money
from him at the Yankee camp.  He wouldn't have taken me.  He was
just testing me.  He's loved me all along and I've been so mean to
him.  Time and again, I've hurt him and he was too proud to show
it.  And when Bonnie died--  Oh, how could I?"

She stood up straight and looked at the house on the hill.  She had
thought, half an hour ago, that she had lost everything in the
world, except money, everything that made life desirable, Ellen,
Gerald, Bonnie, Mammy, Melanie and Ashley.  She had to lose them
all to realize that she loved Rhett--loved him because he was
strong and unscrupulous, passionate and earthy, like herself.

"I'll tell him everything," she thought.  "He'll understand.  He's
always understood.  I'll tell him what a fool I've been and how
much I love him and I'll make it up to him."

Suddenly she felt strong and happy.  She was not afraid of the
darkness or the fog and she knew with a singing in her heart that
she would never fear them again.  No matter what mists might curl
around her in the future, she knew her refuge.  She started briskly
up the street toward home and the blocks seemed very long.  Far,
far too long.  She caught up her skirts to her knees and began to
run lightly.  But this time she was not running from fear.  She was
running because Rhett's arms were at the end of the street.



CHAPTER LXIII


The front door was slightly ajar and she trotted, breathless, into
the hall and paused for a moment under the rainbow prisms of the
chandelier.  For all its brightness the house was very still, not
with the serene stillness of sleep but with a watchful, tired
silence that was faintly ominous.  She saw at a glance that Rhett
was not in the parlor or the library and her heart sank.  Suppose
he should be out--out with Belle or wherever it was he spent the
many evenings when he did not appear at the supper table?  She had
not bargained on this.

She had started up the steps in search of him when she saw that the
door of the dining room was closed.  Her heart contracted a little
with shame at the sight of that closed door, remembering the many
nights of this last summer when Rhett had sat there alone, drinking
until he was sodden and Pork came to urge him to bed.  That had
been her fault but she'd change it all.  Everything was to be
different from now on--but, please God, don't let him be too drunk
tonight.  If he's too drunk he won't believe me and he'll laugh at
me and that will break my heart.

She quietly opened the dining-room door a crack and peered in.  He
was seated before the table, slumped in his chair, and a full
decanter stood before him with the stopper in place, the glass
unused.  Thank God, he was sober!  She pulled open the door,
holding herself back from running to him.  But when he looked up at
her, something in his gaze stopped her dead on the threshold,
stilled the words on her lips.

He looked at her steadily with dark eyes that were heavy with
fatigue and there was no leaping light in them.  Though her hair
was tumbling about her shoulders, her bosom heaving breathlessly
and her skirts mud splattered to the knees, his face did not change
with surprise or question or his lips twist with mockery.  He was
sunken in his chair, his suit wrinkling untidily against his
thickening waist, every line of him proclaiming the ruin of a fine
body and the coarsening of a strong face.  Drink and dissipation
had done their work on the coin-clean profile and now it was no
longer the head of a young pagan prince on new-minted gold but a
decadent, tired Caesar on copper debased by long usage.  He looked
up at her as she stood there, hand on heart, looked quietly, almost
in a kindly way, that frightened her.

"Come and sit down," he said.  "She is dead?"

She nodded and advanced hesitantly toward him, uncertainty taking
form in her mind at this new expression on his face.  Without
rising, he pushed back a chair with his foot and she sank into it.
She wished he had not spoken of Melanie so soon.  She did not want
to talk of her now, to re-live the agony of the last hour.  There
was all the rest of her life in which to speak of Melanie.  But it
seemed to her now, driven by a fierce desire to cry:  "I love you,"
that there was only this night, this hour, in which to tell Rhett
what was in her mind.  But there was something in his face that
stopped her and she was suddenly ashamed to speak of love when
Melanie was hardly cold.

"Well, God rest her," he said heavily.  "She was the only completely
kind person I ever knew."

"Oh, Rhett!" she cried miserably, for his words brought up too
vividly all the kind things Melanie had ever done for her.  "Why
didn't you come in with me?  It was dreadful--and I needed you so!"

"I couldn't have borne it," he said simply and for a moment he was
silent.  Then he spoke with an effort and said, softly:  "A very
great lady."

His somber gaze went past her and in his eyes was the same look she
had seen in the light of the flames the night Atlanta fell, when he
told her he was going off with the retreating army--the surprise of
a man who knows himself utterly, yet discovers in himself
unexpected loyalties and emotions and feels a faint self-ridicule
at the discovery.

His moody eyes went over her shoulder as though he saw Melanie
silently passing through the room to the door.  In the look of
farewell on his face there was no sorrow, no pain, only a
speculative wonder at himself, only a poignant stirring of emotions
dead since boyhood, as he said again:  "A very great lady."

Scarlett shivered and the glow went from her heart, the fine
warmth, the splendor which had sent her home on winged feet.  She
half-grasped what was in Rhett's mind as he said farewell to the
only person in the world he respected and she was desolate again
with a terrible sense of loss that was no longer personal.  She
could not wholly understand or analyze what he was feeling, but it
seemed almost as if she too had been brushed by whispering skirts,
touching her softly in a last caress.  She was seeing through
Rhett's eyes the passing, not of a woman but of a legend--the
gentle, self-effacing but steel-spined women on whom the South had
builded its house in war and to whose proud and loving arms it had
returned in defeat.

His eyes came back to her and his voice changed.  Now it was light
and cool.

"So she's dead.  That makes it nice for you, doesn't it?"

"Oh, how can you say such things," she cried, stung, the quick
tears coming to her eyes.  "You know how I loved her!"

"No, I can't say I did.  Most unexpected and it's to your credit,
considering your passion for white trash, that you could appreciate
her at last."

"How can you talk so?  Of course I appreciated her!  You didn't.
You didn't know her like I did!  It isn't in you to understand her--
how good she was--"

"Indeed?  Perhaps not."

"She thought of everybody except herself--why, her last words were
about you."

There was a flash of genuine feeling in his eyes as he turned to
her.

"What did she say?"

"Oh, not now, Rhett."

"Tell me."

His voice was cool but the hand he put on her wrist hurt.  She did
not want to tell, this was not the way she had intended to lead up
to the subject of her love but his hand was urgent.

"She said--she said--  'Be kind to Captain Butler.  He loves you so
much.'"

He stared at her and dropped her wrist.  His eyelids went down,
leaving his face dark and blank.  Suddenly he rose and going to the
window, he drew the curtains and looked out intently as if there
were something to see outside except blinding mist.

"Did she say anything else?" he questioned, not turning his head.

"She asked me to take care of little Beau and I said I would, like
he was my own boy."

"What else?"

"She said--Ashley--she asked me to look after Ashley, too."

He was silent for a moment and then he laughed softly.  "It's
convenient to have the first wife's permission, isn't it?"

"What do you mean?"

He turned and even in her confusion she was surprised that there
was no mockery in his face.  Nor was there any more interest in it
than in the face of a man watching the last act of a none-too-
amusing comedy.

"I think my meaning's plain enough.  Miss Melly is dead.  You
certainly have all the evidence you want to divorce me and you
haven't enough reputation left for a divorce to hurt you.  And you
haven't any religion left, so the Church won't matter.  Then--
Ashley and dreams come true with the blessings of Miss Melly."

"Divorce?" she cried.  "No!  No!"  Incoherent for a moment she
leaped to her feet and running to him caught his arm.  "Oh, you're
all wrong!  Terribly wrong.  I don't want a divorce--I--"  She
stopped for she could find no other words.

He put his hand under her chin, quietly turned her face up to the
light and looked for an intent moment into her eyes.  She looked up
at him, her heart in her eyes, her lips quivering as she tried to
speak.  But she could marshal no words because she was trying to
find in his face some answering emotions, some leaping light of
hope, of joy.  Surely he must know, now!  But the smooth dark
blankness which had baffled her so often was all that her frantic,
searching eyes could find.  He dropped her chin and, turning,
walked back to his chair and sprawled tiredly again, his chin on
his breast, his eyes looking up at her from under black brows in an
impersonal speculative way.

She followed him back to his chair, her hands twisting, and stood
before him.

"You are wrong," she began again, finding words.  "Rhett, tonight,
when I knew, I ran every step of the way home to tell you.  Oh,
darling, I--"

"You are tired," he said, still watching her.  "You'd better go to
bed."

"But I must tell you!"

"Scarlett," he said heavily, "I don't want to hear--anything."

"But you don't know what I'm going to say!"

"My pet, it's written plainly on your face.  Something, someone has
made you realize that the unfortunate Mr. Wilkes is too large a
mouthful of Dead Sea fruit for even you to chew.  And that same
something has suddenly set my charms before you in a new and
attractive light," he sighed slightly.  "And it's no use to talk
about it."

She drew a sharp surprised breath.  Of course, he had always read
her easily.  Heretofore she had resented it but now, after the
first shock at her own transparency, her heart rose with gladness
and relief.  He knew, he understood and her task was miraculously
made easy.  No use to talk about it!  Of course he was bitter at
her long neglect, of course he was mistrustful of her sudden
turnabout.  She would have to woo him with kindness, convince him
with a rich outpouring of love, and what a pleasure it would be to
do it!

"Darling, I'm going to tell you everything," she said, putting her
hands on the arm of his chair and leaning down to him.  "I've been
so wrong, such a stupid fool--"

"Scarlett, don't go on with this.  Don't be humble before me.  I
can't bear it.  Leave us some dignity, some reticence to remember
out of our marriage.  Spare us this last."

She straightened up abruptly.  Spare us this last?  What did he
mean by "this last"?  Last?  This was their first, their beginning.

"But I will tell you," she began rapidly, as if fearing his hand
upon her mouth, silencing her.  "Oh, Rhett, I love you so, darling!
I must have loved you for years and I was such a fool I didn't know
it.  Rhett, you must believe me!"

He looked at her, standing before him, for a moment, a long look
that went to the back of her mind.  She saw there was belief in his
eyes but little interest.  Oh, was he going to be mean, at this of
all times?  To torment her, pay her back in her own coin?

"Oh, I believe you," he said at last.  "But what of Ashley Wilkes?"

"Ashley!" she said, and made an impatient gesture.  "I--I don't
believe I've cared anything about him for ages.  It was--well, a
sort of habit I hung onto from when I was a little girl.  Rhett,
I'd never even thought I cared about him if I'd ever known what he
was really like.  He's such a helpless, poor-spirited creature, for
all his prattle about truth and honor and--"

"No," said Rhett.  "If you must see him as he really is, see him
straight.  He's only a gentleman caught in a world he doesn't
belong in, trying to make a poor best of it by the rules of the
world that's gone."

"Oh, Rhett, don't let's talk of him!  What does he matter now?
Aren't you glad to know--  I mean, now that I--"

As his tired eyes met hers, she broke off in embarrassment, shy as
a girl with her first beau.  If he'd only make it easier for her!
If only he would hold out his arms, so she could crawl thankfully
into his lap and lay her head on his chest.  Her lips on his could
tell him better than all her stumbling words.  But as she looked at
him, she realized that he was not holding her off just to be mean.
He looked drained and as though nothing she had said was of any
moment.

"Glad?" he said.  "Once I would have thanked God, fasting, to hear
you say all this.  But, now, it doesn't matter."

"Doesn't matter?  What are you talking about?  Of course, it
matters!  Rhett, you do care, don't you?  You must care.  Melly
said you did."

"Well, she was right, as far as she knew.  But, Scarlett, did it
ever occur to you that even the most deathless love could wear
out?"

She looked at him speechless, her mouth a round O.

"Mine wore out," he went on, "against Ashley Wilkes and your insane
obstinacy that makes you hold on like a bulldog to anything you
think you want. . . .  Mine wore out."

"But love can't wear out!"

"Yours for Ashley did."

"But I never really loved Ashley!"

"Then, you certainly gave a good imitation of it--up till tonight.
Scarlett, I'm not upbraiding you, accusing you, reproaching you.
That time has passed.  So spare me your defenses and your
explanations.  If you can manage to listen to me for a few minutes
without interrupting, I can explain what I mean.  Though God knows,
I see no need for explanations.  The truth's so plain."

She sat down, the harsh gas light falling on her white bewildered
face.  She looked into the eyes she knew so well--and knew so
little--listened to his quiet voice saying words which at first
meant nothing.  This was the first time he had ever talked to her
in this manner, as one human being to another, talked as other
people talked, without flippancy, mockery or riddles.

"Did it ever occur to you that I loved you as much as a man can
love a woman?  Loved you for years before I finally got you?
During the war I'd go away and try to forget you, but I couldn't
and I always had to come back.  After the war I risked arrest, just
to come back and find you.  I cared so much I believe I would have
killed Frank Kennedy if he hadn't died when he did.  I loved you
but I couldn't let you know it.  You're so brutal to those who love
you, Scarlett.  You take their love and hold it over their heads
like a whip."

Out of it all only the fact that he loved her meant anything.  At
the faint echo of passion in his voice, pleasure and excitement
crept back into her.  She sat, hardly breathing, listening,
waiting.

"I knew you didn't love me when I married you.  I knew about
Ashley, you see.  But, fool that I was, I thought I could make you
care.  Laugh, if you like, but I wanted to take care of you, to pet
you, to give you everything you wanted.  I wanted to marry you and
protect you and give you a free rein in anything that would make
you happy--just as I did Bonnie.  You'd had such a struggle,
Scarlett.  No one knew better than I what you'd gone through and I
wanted you to stop fighting and let me fight for you.  I wanted you
to play, like a child--for you were a child, a brave, frightened,
bullheaded child.  I think you are still a child.  No one but a
child could be so headstrong and so insensitive."

His voice was calm and tired but there was something in the quality
of it that raised a ghost of memory in Scarlett.  She had heard a
voice like this once before and at some other crisis of her life.
Where had it been?  The voice of a man facing himself and his world
without feeling, without flinching, without hope.

Why--why--it had been Ashley in the wintry, windswept orchard at
Tara, talking of life and shadow shows with a tired calmness that
had more finality in its timbre than any desperate bitterness could
have revealed.  Even as Ashley's voice then had turned her cold
with dread of things she could not understand, so now Rhett's voice
made her heart sink.  His voice, his manner, more than the content
of his words, disturbed her, made her realize that her pleasurable
excitement of a few moments ago had been untimely.  Something was
wrong, badly wrong.  What it was she did not know but she listened
desperately, her eyes on his brown face, hoping to hear words that
would dissipate her fears.

"It was so obvious that we were meant for each other.  So obvious
that I was the only man of your acquaintance who could love you
after knowing you as you really are--hard and greedy and
unscrupulous, like me.  I loved you and I took the chance.  I
thought Ashley would fade out of your mind.  But," he shrugged, "I
tried everything I knew and nothing worked.  And I loved you so,
Scarlett.  If you had only let me, I could have loved you as gently
and as tenderly as ever a man loved a woman.  But I couldn't let
you know, for I knew you'd think me weak and try to use my love
against me.  And always--always there was Ashley.  It drove me
crazy.  I couldn't sit across the table from you every night,
knowing you wished Ashley was sitting there in my place.  And I
couldn't hold you in my arms at night and know that--well, it
doesn't matter now.  I wonder, now, why it hurt.  That's what drove
me to Belle.  There is a certain swinish comfort in being with a
woman who loves you utterly and respects you for being a fine
gentleman--even if she is an illiterate whore.  It soothed my
vanity.  You've never been very soothing, my dear."

"Oh, Rhett . . ." she began, miserable at the very mention of
Belle's name, but he waved her to silence and went on.

"And then, that night when I carried you upstairs--I thought--I
hoped--I hoped so much I was afraid to face you the next morning,
for fear I'd been mistaken and you didn't love me.  I was so afraid
you'd laugh at me I went off and got drunk.  And when I came back,
I was shaking in my boots and if you had come even halfway to meet
me, had given me some sign, I think I'd have kissed your feet.  But
you didn't."

"Oh, but Rhett, I did want you then but you were so nasty!  I did
want you!  I think--yes, that must have been when I first knew I
cared about you.  Ashley--I never was happy about Ashley after
that, but you were so nasty that I--"

"Oh, well," he said.  "It seems we've been at cross purposes,
doesn't it?  But it doesn't matter now.  I'm only telling you, so
you won't ever wonder about it all.  When you were sick and it was
all my fault, I stood outside your door, hoping you'd call for me,
but you didn't, and then I knew what a fool I'd been and that it
was all over."

He stopped and looked through her and beyond her, even as Ashley
had often done, seeing something she could not see.  And she could
only stare speechless at his brooding face.

"But then, there was Bonnie and I saw that everything wasn't over,
after all.  I liked to think that Bonnie was you, a little girl
again, before the war and poverty had done things to you.  She was
so like you, so willful, so brave and gay and full of high spirits,
and I could pet her and spoil her--just as I wanted to pet you.
But she wasn't like you--she loved me.  It was a blessing that I
could take the love you didn't want and give it to her. . . .  When
she went, she took everything."

Suddenly she was sorry for him, sorry with a completeness that
wiped out her own grief and her fear of what his words might mean.
It was the first time in her life she had been sorry for anyone
without feeling contemptuous as well, because it was the first time
she had ever approached understanding any other human being.  And
she could understand his shrewd caginess, so like her own, his
obstinate pride that kept him from admitting his love for fear of a
rebuff.

"Ah, darling," she said coming forward, hoping he would put out his
arms and draw her to his knees.  "Darling, I'm so sorry but I'll
make it all up to you!  We can be so happy, now that we know the
truth and--Rhett--look at me, Rhett!  There--there can be other
babies--not like Bonnie but--"

"Thank you, no," said Rhett, as if he were refusing a piece of
bread.  "I'll not risk my heart a third time."

"Rhett, don't say such things!  Oh, what can I say to make you
understand?  I've told you how sorry I am--"

"My darling, you're such a child.  You think that by saying,
'I'm sorry,' all the errors and hurts of years past can be
remedied, obliterated from the mind, all the poison drawn from
old wounds. . . .  Take my handkerchief, Scarlett.  Never, at any
crisis of your life, have I known you to have a handkerchief."

She took the handkerchief, blew her nose and sat down.  It was
obvious that he was not going to take her in his arms.  It was
beginning to be obvious that all his talk about loving her meant
nothing.  It was a tale of a time long past, and he was looking at
it as though it had never happened to him.  And that was
frightening.  He looked at her in an almost kindly way, speculation
in his eyes.

"How old are you, my dear?  You never would tell me."

"Twenty-eight," she answered dully, muffled in the handkerchief.

"That's not a vast age.  It's a young age to have gained the whole
world and lost your own soul, isn't it?  Don't look frightened.
I'm not referring to hell fire to come for your affair with Ashley.
I'm merely speaking metaphorically.  Ever since I've known you,
you've wanted two things.  Ashley and to be rich enough to tell the
world to go to hell.  Well, you are rich enough and you've spoken
sharply to the world and you've got Ashley, if you want him.  But
all that doesn't seem to be enough now."

She was frightened but not at the thought of hell fire.  She was
thinking:  "But Rhett is my soul and I'm losing him.  And if I lose
him, nothing else matters!  No, not friends or money or--or
anything.  If only I had him I wouldn't even mind being poor again.
No, I wouldn't mind being cold again or even hungry.  But he can't
mean--  Oh, he can't!"

She wiped her eyes and said desperately:

"Rhett, if you once loved me so much, there must be something left
for me."

"Out of it all I find only two things that remain and they are the
two things you hate the most--pity and an odd feeling of kindness."

Pity!  Kindness!  "Oh, my God," she thought despairingly.  Anything
but pity and kindness.  Whenever she felt these two emotions for
anyone, they went hand in hand with contempt.  Was he contemptuous
of her too?  Anything would be preferable to that.  Even the
cynical coolness of the war days, the drunken madness that drove
him the night he carried her up the stairs, his hard fingers
bruising her body, or the barbed drawling words that she now
realized had covered a bitter love.  Anything except this
impersonal kindness that was written so plainly in his face.

"Then--then you mean I've ruined it all--that you don't love me any
more?"

"That's right."

"But," she said stubbornly, like a child who still feels that to
state a desire is to gain that desire, "but I love you!"

"That's your misfortune."

She looked up quickly to see if there was a jeer behind those words
but there was none.  He was simply stating a fact.  But it was a
fact she still would not believe--could not believe.  She looked at
him with slanting eyes that burned with a desperate obstinacy and
the sudden hard line of jaw that sprang out through her soft cheek
was Gerald's jaw.

"Don't be a fool, Rhett!  I can make--"

He flung up a hand in mock horror and his black brows went up in
the old sardonic crescents.

"Don't look so determined, Scarlett!  You frighten me.  I see you
are contemplating the transfer of your tempestuous affections from
Ashley to me and I fear for my liberty and my peace of mind.  No,
Scarlett, I will not be pursued as the luckless Ashley was pursued.
Besides, I am going away."

Her jaw trembled before she clenched her teeth to steady it.  Go
away?  No, anything but that!  How could life go on without him?
Everyone had gone from her, everyone who mattered except Rhett.  He
couldn't go.  But how could she stop him?  She was powerless
against his cool mind, his disinterested words.

"I am going away.  I intended to tell you when you came home from
Marietta."

"You are deserting me?"

"Don't be the neglected, dramatic wife, Scarlett.  The role isn't
becoming.  I take it, then, you do not want a divorce or even a
separation?  Well, then, I'll come back often enough to keep gossip
down."

"Damn gossip!" she said fiercely.  "It's you I want.  Take me with
you!"

"No," he said, and there was finality in his voice.  For a moment
she was on the verge of an outburst of childish wild tears.  She
could have thrown herself on the floor, cursed and screamed and
drummed her heels.  But some remnant of pride, of common sense
stiffened her.  She thought, if I did, he'd only laugh, or just
look at me.  I mustn't bawl; I mustn't beg.  I mustn't do anything
to risk his contempt.  He must respect me even--even if he doesn't
love me.

She lifted her chin and managed to ask quietly:

"Where will you go?"

There was a faint gleam of admiration in his eyes as he answered.

"Perhaps to England--or to Paris.  Perhaps to Charleston to try to
make peace with my people."

"But you hate them!  I've heard you laugh at them so often and--"

He shrugged.

"I still laugh--but I've reached the end of roaming, Scarlett.  I'm
forty-five--the age when a man begins to value some of the things
he's thrown away so lightly in youth, the clannishness of families,
honor and security, roots that go deep--  Oh, no! I'm not recanting,
I'm not regretting anything I've ever done.  I've had a hell of a
good time--such a hell of a good time that it's begun to pall and
now I want something different.  No, I never intend to change more
than my spots.  But I want the outer semblance of the things I used
to know, the utter boredom of respectability--other people's
respectability, my pet, not my own--the calm dignity life can have
when it's lived by gentle folks, the genial grace of days that are
gone.  When I lived those days I didn't realize the slow charm of
them--"

Again Scarlett was back in the windy orchard of Tara and there was
the same look in Rhett's eyes that had been in Ashley's eyes that
day.  Ashley's words were as clear in her ears as though he and not
Rhett were speaking.  Fragments of words came back to her and she
quoted parrot-like:  "A glamor to it--a perfection, a symmetry like
Grecian art."

Rhett said sharply:  "Why did you say that?  That's what I meant."

"It was something that--that Ashley said once, about the old days."

He shrugged and the light went out of his eyes.

"Always Ashley," he said and was silent for a moment.

"Scarlett, when you are forty-five, perhaps you will know what I'm
talking about and then perhaps you, too, will be tired of imitation
gentry and shoddy manners and cheap emotions.  But I doubt it.  I
think you'll always be more attracted by glister than by gold.
Anyway, I can't wait that long to see.  And I have no desire to
wait.  It just doesn't interest me.  I'm going to hunt in old towns
and old countries where some of the old times must still linger.
I'm that sentimental.  Atlanta's too raw for me, too new."

"Stop," she said suddenly.  She had hardly heard anything he had
said.  Certainly her mind had not taken it in.  But she knew she
could no longer endure with any fortitude the sound of his voice
when there was no love in it.

He paused and looked at her quizzically.

"Well, you get my meaning, don't you?" he questioned, rising to his
feet.

She threw out her hands to him, palms up, in the age-old gesture of
appeal and her heart, again, was in her face.

"No," she cried.  "All I know is that you do not love me and you
are going away!  Oh, my darling, if you go, what shall I do?"

For a moment he hesitated as if debating whether a kind lie were
kinder in the long run than the truth.  Then he shrugged.

"Scarlett, I was never one to patiently pick up broken fragments
and glue them together and tell myself that the mended whole was as
good as new.  What is broken is broken--and I'd rather remember it
as it was at its best than mend it and see the broken places as
long as I lived.  Perhaps, if I were younger--" he sighed.  "But
I'm too old to believe in such sentimentalities as clean slates and
starting all over.  I'm too old to shoulder the burden of constant
lies that go with living in polite disillusionment.  I couldn't
live with you and lie to you and I certainly couldn't lie to
myself.  I can't even lie to you now.  I wish I could care what you
do or where you go, but I can't."

He drew a short breath and said lightly but softly:

"My dear, I don't give a damn."


                   *       *       *       *       *


She silently watched him go up the stairs, feeling that she would
strangle at the pain in her throat.  With the sound of his feet
dying away in the upper hall was dying the last thing in the world
that mattered.  She knew now that there was no appeal of emotion or
reason which would turn that cool brain from its verdict.  She knew
now that he had meant every word he said, lightly though some of
them had been spoken.  She knew because she sensed in him something
strong, unyielding, implacable--all the qualities she had looked
for in Ashley and never found.

She had never understood either of the men she had loved and so she
had lost them both.  Now, she had a fumbling knowledge that, had
she ever understood Ashley, she would never have loved him; had she
ever understood Rhett, she would never have lost him.  She wondered
forlornly if she had ever really understood anyone in the world.

There was a merciful dullness in her mind now, a dullness that she
knew from long experience would soon give way to sharp pain, even
as severed tissues, shocked by the surgeon's knife, have a brief
instant of insensibility before their agony begins.

"I won't think of it now," she thought grimly, summoning up her old
charm.  "I'll go crazy if I think about losing him now.  I'll think
of it tomorrow."

"But," cried her heart, casting aside the charm and beginning to
ache, "I can't let him go!  There must be some way!"

"I won't think of it now," she said again, aloud, trying to push
her misery to the back of her mind, trying to find some bulwark
against the rising tide of pain.  "I'll--why, I'll go home to Tara
tomorrow," and her spirits lifted faintly.

She had gone back to Tara once in fear and defeat and she had
emerged from its sheltering walls strong and armed for victory.
What she had done once, somehow--please God, she could do again!
How, she did not know.  She did not want to think of that now.  All
she wanted was a breathing space in which to hurt, a quiet place to
lick her wounds, a haven in which to plan her campaign.  She
thought of Tara and it was as if a gentle cool hand were stealing
over her heart.  She could see the white house gleaming welcome to
her through the reddening autumn leaves, feel the quiet hush of the
country twilight coming down over her like a benediction, feel the
dews falling on the acres of green bushes starred with fleecy
white, see the raw color of the red earth and the dismal dark
beauty of the pines on the rolling hills.

She felt vaguely comforted, strengthened by the picture, and some
of her hurt and frantic regret was pushed from the top of her mind.
She stood for a moment remembering small things, the avenue of dark
cedars leading to Tara, the banks of cape jessamine bushes, vivid
green against the white walls, the fluttering white curtains.  And
Mammy would be there.  Suddenly she wanted Mammy desperately, as
she had wanted her when she was a little girl, wanted the broad
bosom on which to lay her head, the gnarled black hand on her hair.
Mammy, the last link with the old days.

With the spirit of her people who would not know defeat, even when
it stared them in the face, she raised her chin.  She could get
Rhett back.  She knew she could.  There had never been a man she
couldn't get, once she set her mind upon him.

"I'll think of it all tomorrow, at Tara.  I can stand it then.
Tomorrow, I'll think of some way to get him back.  After all,
tomorrow is another day."



THE END