CHAPTER XXV


The next morning Scarlett's body was so stiff and sore from the
long miles of walking and jolting in the wagon that every movement
was agony.  Her face was crimson with sunburn and her blistered
palms raw.  Her tongue was furred and her throat parched as if
flames had scorched it and no amount of water could assuage her
thirst.  Her head felt swollen and she winced even when she turned
her eyes.  A queasiness of the stomach reminiscent of the early
days of her pregnancy made the smoking yams on the breakfast table
unendurable, even to the smell.  Gerald could have told her she was
suffering the normal aftermath of her first experience with hard
drinking but Gerald noticed nothing.  He sat at the head of the
table, a gray old man with absent, faded eyes fastened on the door
and head cocked slightly to hear the rustle of Ellen's petticoats,
to smell the lemon verbena sachet.

As Scarlett sat down, he mumbled:  "We will wait for Mrs. O'Hara.
She is late."  She raised an aching head, looked at him with
startled incredulity and met the pleading eyes of Mammy, who stood
behind Gerald's chair.  She rose unsteadily, her hand at her throat
and looked down at her father in the morning sunlight.  He peered
up at her vaguely and she saw that his hands were shaking, that his
head trembled a little.

Until this moment she had not realized how much she had counted on
Gerald to take command, to tell her what she must do, and now--
Why, last night he had seemed almost himself.  There had been none
of his usual bluster and vitality, but at least he had told a
connected story and now--now, he did not even remember Ellen was
dead.  The combined shock of the coming of the Yankees and her
death had stunned him.  She started to speak, but Mammy shook her
head vehemently and raising her apron dabbed at her red eyes.

"Oh, can Pa have lost his mind?" thought Scarlett and her throbbing
head felt as if it would crack with this added strain.  "No, no.
He's just dazed by it all.  It's like he was sick.  He'll get over
it.  He must get over it.  What will I do if he doesn't?--I won't
think about it now.  I won't think of him or Mother or any of these
awful things now.  No, not till I can stand it.  There are too many
other things to think about--things that can be helped without my
thinking of those I can't help."

She left the dining room without eating, and went out onto the back
porch where she found Pork, barefooted and in the ragged remains of
his best livery, sitting on the steps cracking peanuts.  Her head
was hammering and throbbing and the bright, sunlight stabbed into
her eyes.  Merely holding herself erect required an effort of will
power and she talked as briefly as possible, dispensing with the
usual forms of courtesy her mother had always taught her to use
with negroes.

She began asking questions so brusquely and giving orders so
decisively Pork's eyebrows went up in mystification.  Miss Ellen
didn't never talk so short to nobody, not even when she caught them
stealing pullets and watermelons.  She asked again about the
fields, the gardens, the stock, and her green eyes had a hard
bright glaze which Pork had never seen in them before.

"Yas'm, dat hawse daid, lyin' dar whar Ah tie him wid his nose in
de water bucket he tuhned over.  No'm, de cow ain' daid.  Din' you
know?  She done have a calf las' night.  Dat why she beller so."

"A fine midwife your Prissy will make," Scarlett remarked
caustically.  "She said she was bellowing because she needed
milking."

"Well'm, Prissy ain' fixin' ter be no cow midwife, Miss Scarlett,"
Pork said tactfully.  "An' ain' no use quarrelin' wid blessin's,
'cause dat calf gwine ter mean a full cow an' plen'y buttermilk fer
de young Misses, lak dat Yankee doctah say dey' need."

"All right, go on.  Any stock left?"

"No'm.  Nuthin' 'cept one ole sow an' her litter.  Ah driv dem
inter de swamp de day de Yankees come, but de Lawd knows how we
gwine git dem.  She mean, dat sow."

"We'll get them all right.  You and Prissy can start right now
hunting for her."

Pork was amazed and indignant.

"Miss Scarlett, dat a fe'el han's bizness.  Ah's allus been a house
nigger."

A small fiend with a pair of hot tweezers plucked behind Scarlett's
eyeballs.

"You two will catch the sow--or get out of here, like the field
hands did."

Tears trembled in Pork's hurt eyes.  Oh, if only Miss Ellen was
here!  She understood such niceties and realized the wide gap
between the duties of a field hand and those of a house nigger.

"Git out, Miss Scarlett?  Whar'd Ah git out to, Miss Scarlett?"

"I don't know and I don't care.  But anyone at Tara who won't work
can go hunt up the Yankees.  You can tell the others that too."

"Now, what about the corn and the cotton, Pork?"

"De cawn?  Lawd, Miss Scarlett, dey pasture dey hawses in de cawn
an' cah'ied off whut de hawses din' eat or spile.  An' dey driv dey
cannons an' waggins 'cross de cotton till it plum ruint, 'cept a
few acres over on de creek bottom dat dey din' notice.  But dat
cotton ain' wuth foolin' wid, 'cause ain' but 'bout three bales
over dar."

Three bales.  Scarlett thought of the scores of bales Tara usually
yielded and her head hurt worse.  Three bales.  That was little
more than the shiftless Slatterys raised.  To make matters worse,
there was the question of taxes.  The Confederate government took
cotton for taxes in lieu of money, but three bales wouldn't even
cover the taxes.  Little did it matter though, to her or the
Confederacy, now that all the field hands had run away and there
was no one to pick the cotton.

"Well, I won't think of that either," she told herself.  "Taxes
aren't a woman's job anyway.  Pa ought to look after such things,
but Pa--  I won't think of Pa now.  The Confederacy can whistle for
its taxes.  What we need now is something to eat."

"Pork, have any of you been to Twelve Oaks or the MacIntosh place
to see if there's anything left in the gardens there?"

"No, Ma'm!  Us ain' lef' Tara.  De Yankees mout git us."

"I'll send Dilcey over to MacIntosh.  Perhaps she'll find something
there.  And I'll go to Twelve Oaks."

"Who wid, chile?"

"By myself.  Mammy must stay with the girls and Mr. Gerald can't--"

Pork set up an outcry which she found infuriating.  There might be
Yankees or mean niggers at Twelve Oaks.  She mustn't go alone.

"That will be enough, Pork.  Tell Dilcey to start immediately.  And
you and Prissy go bring in the sow and her litter," she said
briefly, turning on her heel.

Mammy's old sunbonnet, faded but clean, hung on its peg on the back
porch and Scarlett put it on her head, remembering, as from another
world, the bonnet with the curling green plume which Rhett had
brought her from Paris.  She picked up a large split-oak basket and
started down the back stairs, each step jouncing her head until her
spine seemed to be trying to crash through the top of her skull.

The road down to the river lay red and scorching between the ruined
cotton fields.  There were no trees to cast a shade and the sun
beat down through Mammy's sunbonnet as if it were made of tarlatan
instead of heavy quilted calico, while the dust floating upward
sifted into her nose and throat until she felt the membranes would
crack dryly if she spoke.  Deep ruts and furrows were cut into the
road where horses had dragged heavy guns along it and the red
gullies on either side were deeply gashed by the wheels.  The
cotton was mangled and trampled where cavalry and infantry, forced
off the narrow road by the artillery, had marched through the green
bushes, grinding them into the earth.  Here and there in the road
and fields lay buckles and bits of harness leather, canteens
flattened by hooves and caisson wheels, buttons, blue caps, worn
socks, bits of bloody rags, all the litter left by the marching
army.

She passed the clump of cedars and the low brick wall which marked
the family burying ground, trying not to think of the new grave
lying by the three short mounds of her little brothers.  Oh, Ellen--
She trudged on down the dusty hill, passing the heap of ashes
and the stumpy chimney where the Slattery house had stood, and she
wished savagely that the whole tribe of them had been part of the
ashes.  If it hadn't been for the Slatterys--if it hadn't been for
that nasty Emmie who'd had a bastard brat by their overseer--Ellen
wouldn't have died.

She moaned as a sharp pebble cut into her blistered foot.  What was
she doing here?  Why was Scarlett O'Hara, the belle of the County,
the sheltered pride of Tara, tramping down this rough road almost
barefoot?  Her little feet were made to dance, not to limp, her
tiny slippers to peep daringly from under bright silks, not to
collect sharp pebbles and dust.  She was born to be pampered and
waited upon, and here she was, sick and ragged, driven by hunger to
hunt for food in the gardens of her neighbors.

At the bottom of the long hill was the river and how cool and still
were the tangled trees overhanging the water!  She sank down on the
low bank, and stripping off the remnants of her slippers and
stockings, dabbled her burning feet in the cool water.  It would be
so good to sit here all day, away from the helpless eyes of Tara,
here where only the rustle of leaves and the gurgle of slow water
broke the stillness.  But reluctantly she replaced her shoes and
stockings and trudged down the bank, spongy with moss, under the
shady trees.  The Yankees had burned the bridge but she knew of a
footlog bridge across a narrow point of the stream a hundred yards
below.  She crossed it cautiously and trudged uphill the hot half-
mile to Twelve Oaks.

There towered the twelve oaks, as they had stood since Indian days,
but with their leaves brown from fire and the branches burned and
scorched.  Within their circle lay the ruins of John Wilkes' house,
the charred remains of that once stately home which had crowned the
hill in white-columned dignity.  The deep pit which had been the
cellar, the blackened field-stone foundations and two mighty
chimneys marked the site.  One long column, half-burned, had fallen
across the lawn, crushing the cape jessamine bushes.

Scarlett sat down on the column, too sick at the sight to go on.
This desolation went to her heart as nothing she had ever
experienced.  Here was the Wilkes pride in the dust at her feet.
Here was the end of the kindly, courteous house which had always
welcomed her, the house where in futile dreams she had aspired to
be mistress.  Here she had danced and dined and flirted and here
she had watched with a jealous, hurting heart how Melanie smiled up
at Ashley.  Here, too, in the cool shadows of the trees, Charles
Hamilton had rapturously pressed her hand when she said she would
marry him.

"Oh, Ashley," she thought, "I hope you are dead!  I could never
bear for you to see this."

Ashley had married his bride here but his son and his son's son
would never bring brides to this house.  There would be no more
matings and births beneath this roof which she had so loved and
longed to rule.  The house was dead and to Scarlett, it was as if
all the Wilkeses, too, were dead in its ashes.

"I won't think of it now.  I can't stand it now.  I'll think of it
later," she said aloud, turning her eyes away.

Seeking the garden, she limped around the ruins, by the trampled
rose beds the Wilkes girls had tended so zealously, across the back
yard and through the ashes to the smokehouse, barns and chicken
houses.  The split-rail fence around the kitchen garden had been
demolished and the once orderly rows of green plants had suffered
the same treatment as those at Tara.  The soft earth was scarred
with hoof prints and heavy wheels and the vegetables were mashed
into the soil.  There was nothing for her here.

She walked back across the yard and took the path down toward the
silent row of whitewashed cabins in the quarters, calling "Hello!"
as she went.  But no voice answered her.  Not even a dog barked.
Evidently the Wilkes negroes had taken flight or followed the
Yankees.  She knew every slave had his own garden patch and as she
reached the quarters, she hoped these little patches had been
spared.

Her search was rewarded but she was too tired even to feel pleasure
at the sight of turnips and cabbages, wilted for want of water but
still standing, and straggling butter beans and snap beans, yellow
but edible.  She sat down in the furrows and dug into the earth
with hands that shook, filling her basket slowly.  There would be a
good meal at Tara tonight, in spite of the lack of side meat to
boil with the vegetables.  Perhaps some of the bacon grease Dilcey
was using for illumination could be used for seasoning.  She must
remember to tell Dilcey to use pine knots and save the grease for
cooking.

Close to the back step of one cabin, she found a short row of
radishes and hunger assaulted her suddenly.  A spicy, sharp-tasting
radish was exactly what her stomach craved.  Hardly waiting to rub
the dirt off on her skirt, she bit off half and swallowed it
hastily.  It was old and coarse and so peppery that tears started
in her eyes.  No sooner had the lump gone down than her empty
outraged stomach revolted and she lay in the soft dirt and vomited
tiredly.

The faint niggery smell which crept from the cabin increased her
nausea and, without strength to combat it, she kept on retching
miserably while the cabins and trees revolved swiftly around her.

After a long time, she lay weakly on her face, the earth as soft
and comfortable as a feather pillow, and her mind wandered feebly
here and there.  She, Scarlett O'Hara was lying behind a negro
cabin, in the midst of ruins, too sick and too weak to move, and no
one in the world knew or cared.  No one would care if they did
know, for everyone had too many troubles of his own to worry about
her.  And all this was happening to her, Scarlett O'Hara, who had
never raised her hand even to pick up her discarded stockings from
the floor or to tie the laces of her slippers--Scarlett, whose
little headaches and tempers had been coddled and catered to all
her life.

As she lay prostrate, too weak to fight off memories and worries,
they rushed at her like buzzards waiting for death.  No longer had
she the strength to say:  "I'll think of Mother and Pa and Ashley
and all this ruin later--  Yes, later when I can stand it."  She
could not stand it now, but she was thinking of them whether she
willed it or not.  The thoughts circled and swooped above her,
dived down and drove tearing claws and sharp beaks into her mind.
For a timeless time, she lay still, her face in the dirt, the sun
beating hotly upon her, remembering things and people who were
dead, remembering a way of living that was gone forever--and
looking upon the harsh vista of the dark future.

When she arose at last and saw again the black ruins of Twelve
Oaks, her head was raised high and something that was youth and
beauty and potential tenderness had gone out of her face forever.
What was past was past.  Those who were dead were dead.  The lazy
luxury of the old days was gone, never to return.  And, as Scarlett
settled the heavy basket across her arm, she had settled her own
mind and her own life.

There was no going back and she was going forward.

Throughout the South for fifty years there would be bitter-eyed
women who looked backward, to dead times, to dead men, evoking
memories that hurt and were futile, bearing poverty with bitter
pride because they had those memories.  But Scarlett was never to
look back.

She gazed at the blackened stones and, for the last time, she saw
Twelve Oaks rise before her eyes as it had once stood, rich and
proud, symbol of a race and a way of living.  Then she started down
the road toward Tara, the heavy basket cutting into her flesh.

Hunger gnawed at her empty stomach again and she said aloud:  "As
God is my witness, as God is my witness, the Yankees aren't going
to lick me.  I'm going to live through this, and when it's over,
I'm never going to be hungry again.  No, nor any of my folks.  If I
have to steal or kill--as God is my witness, I'm never going to be
hungry again."



In the days that followed, Tara might have been Crusoe's desert
island, so still it was, so isolated from the rest of the world.
The world lay only a few miles away, but a thousand miles of
tumbling waves might have stretched between Tara and Jonesboro and
Fayetteville and Lovejoy, even between Tara and the neighbors'
plantations.  With the old horse dead, their one mode of conveyance
was gone, and there was neither time nor strength for walking the
weary red miles.

Sometimes, in the days of backbreaking work, in the desperate
struggle for food and the never-ceasing care of the three sick
girls, Scarlett found herself straining her ears for familiar
sounds--the shrill laughter of the pickaninnies in the quarters,
the creaking of wagons home from the fields, the thunder of
Gerald's stallion tearing across the pasture, the crunching of
carriage wheels on the drive and the gay voices of neighbors
dropping in for an afternoon of gossip.  But she listened in vain.
The road lay still and deserted and never a cloud of red dust
proclaimed the approach of visitors.  Tara was an island in a sea
of rolling green hills and red fields.

Somewhere was the world and families who ate and slept safely under
their own roofs.  Somewhere girls in thrice-turned dresses were
flirting gaily and singing "When This Cruel War Is Over," as she
had done only a few weeks before.  Somewhere there was a war and
cannon booming and burning towns and men who rotted in hospitals
amid sickening-sweet stinks.  Somewhere a barefoot army in dirty
homespun was marching, fighting, sleeping, hungry and weary with
the weariness that comes when hope is gone.  And somewhere the
hills of Georgia were blue with Yankees, well-fed Yankees on sleek
corn-stuffed horses.

Beyond Tara was the war and the world.  But on the plantation the
war and the world did not exist except as memories which must be
fought back when they rushed to mind in moments of exhaustion.  The
world outside receded before the demands of empty and half-empty
stomachs and life resolved itself into two related thoughts, food
and how to get it.

Food!  Food!  Why did the stomach have a longer memory than the
mind?  Scarlett could banish heartbreak but not hunger and each
morning as she lay half asleep, before memory brought back to her
mind war and hunger, she curled drowsily expecting the sweet smells
of bacon frying and rolls baking.  And each morning she sniffed so
hard to really smell the food she woke herself up.

There were apples, yams, peanuts and milk on the table at Tara but
never enough of even this primitive fare.  At the sight of them,
three times a day, her memory would rush back to the old days, the
meals of the old days, the candle-lit table and the food perfuming
the air.

How careless they had been of food then, what prodigal waste!
Rolls, corn muffins, biscuits and waffles, dripping butter, all at
one meal.  Ham at one end of the table and fried chicken at the
other, collards swimming richly in pot liquor iridescent with
grease, snap beans in mountains on brightly flowered porcelain,
fried squash, stewed okra, carrots in cream sauce thick enough to
cut.  And three desserts, so everyone might have his choice,
chocolate layer cake, vanilla blanc mange and pound cake topped
with sweet whipped cream.  The memory of those savory meals had the
power to bring tears to her eyes as death and war had failed to do,
and the power to turn her ever-gnawing stomach from rumbling
emptiness to nausea.  For the appetite Mammy had always deplored,
the healthy appetite of a nineteen-year-old girl, now was increased
fourfold by the hard and unremitting labor she had never known
before.

Hers was not the only troublesome appetite at Tara, for wherever
she turned hungry faces, black and white, met her eyes.  Soon
Carreen and Suellen would have the insatiable hunger of typhoid
convalescents.  Already little Wade whined monotonously:  "Wade
doan like yams.  Wade hungwy."

The others grumbled, too:

"Miss Scarlett, 'ness I gits mo' to eat, I kain nuss neither of
these chillun."

"Miss Scarlett, ef Ah doan have mo' in mah stummick, Ah kain split
no wood."

"Lamb, Ah's perishin' fer real vittles."

"Daughter, must we always have yams?"

Only Melanie did not complain, Melanie whose face grew thinner and
whiter and twitched with pain even in her sleep.

"I'm not hungry, Scarlett.  Give my share of the milk to Dilcey.
She needs it to nurse the babies.  Sick people are never hungry."

It was her gentle hardihood which irritated Scarlett more than the
nagging whining voices of the others.  She could--and did--shout
them down with bitter sarcasm but before Melanie's unselfishness
she was helpless, helpless and resentful.  Gerald, the negroes and
Wade clung to Melanie now, because even in her weakness she was
kind and sympathetic, and these days Scarlett was neither.

Wade especially haunted Melanie's room.  There was something wrong
with Wade, but just what it was Scarlett had no time to discover.
She took Mammy's word that the little boy had worms and dosed him
with the mixture of dried herbs and bark which Ellen always used to
worm the pickaninnies.  But the vermifuge only made the child look
paler.  These days Scarlett hardly thought of Wade as a person.  He
was only another worry, another mouth to feed.  Some day when the
present emergency was over, she would play with him, tell him
stories and teach him his A B C's but now she did not have the time
or the soul or the inclination.  And, because he always seemed
underfoot when she was most weary and worried, she often spoke
sharply to him.

It annoyed her that her quick reprimands brought such acute fright
to his round eyes, for he looked so simple minded when he was
frightened.  She did not realize that the little boy lived shoulder
to shoulder with terror too great for an adult to comprehend.  Fear
lived with Wade, fear that shook his soul and made him wake
screaming in the night.  Any unexpected noise or sharp word set him
to trembling, for in his mind noises and harsh words were
inextricably mixed with Yankees and he was more afraid of Yankees
than of Prissy's hants.

Until the thunders of the siege began, he had never known anything
but a happy, placid, quiet life.  Even though his mother paid him
little attention, he had known nothing but petting and kind words
until the night when he was jerked from slumber to find the sky
aflame and the air deafening with explosions.  In that night and
the day which followed, he had been slapped by his mother for the
first time and had heard her voice raised at him in harsh words.
Life in the pleasant brick house on Peachtree Street, the only life
he knew, had vanished that night and he would never recover from
its loss.  In the flight from Atlanta, he had understood nothing
except that the Yankees were after him and now he still lived in
fear that the Yankees would catch him and cut him to pieces.
Whenever Scarlett raised her voice in reproof, he went weak with
fright as his vague childish memory brought up the horrors of the
first time she had ever done it.  Now, Yankees and a cross voice
were linked forever in his mind and he was afraid of his mother.

Scarlett could not help noticing that the child was beginning to
avoid her and, in the rare moments when her unending duties gave
her time to think about it, it bothered her a great deal.  It was
even worse than having him at her skirts all the time and she was
offended that his refuge was Melanie's bed where he played quietly
at games Melanie suggested or listened to stories she told.  Wade
adored "Auntee" who had a gentle voice, who always smiled and who
never said:  "Hush, Wade!  You give me a headache" or "Stop
fidgeting, Wade, for Heaven's sake!"

Scarlett had neither the time nor the impulse to pet him but it
made her jealous to see Melanie do it.  When she found him one day
standing on his head in Melanie's bed and saw him collapse on her,
she slapped him.

"Don't you know better than to jiggle Auntee like that when she's
sick?  Now, trot right out in the yard and play, and don't come in
here again."

But Melanie reached out a weak arm and drew the wailing child to
her.

"There, there, Wade.  You didn't mean to jiggle me, did you?  He
doesn't bother me, Scarlett.  Do let him stay with me.  Let me take
care of him.  It's the only thing I can do till I get well, and
you've got your hands full enough without having to watch him."

"Don't be a goose, Melly," said Scarlett shortly.  "You aren't
getting well like you should and having Wade fall on your stomach
won't help you.  Now, Wade, if I ever catch you on Auntee's bed
again, I'll wear you out.  And stop sniffling.  You are always
sniffling.  Try to be a little man."

Wade flew sobbing to hide himself under the house.  Melanie bit her
lip and tears came to her eyes, and Mammy standing in the hall, a
witness to the scene, scowled and breathed hard.  But no one talked
back to Scarlett these days.  They were all afraid of her sharp
tongue, all afraid of the new person who walked in her body.

Scarlett reigned supreme at Tara now and, like others suddenly
elevated to authority, all the bullying instincts in her nature
rose to the surface.  It was not that she was basically unkind.  It
was because she was so frightened and unsure of herself she was
harsh lest others learn her inadequacies and refuse her authority.
Besides, there was some pleasure in shouting at people and knowing
they were afraid.  Scarlett found that it relieved her overwrought
nerves.  She was not blind to the fact that her personality was
changing.  Sometimes when her curt orders made Pork stick out his
under lip and Mammy mutter:  "Some folks rides mighty high dese
days," she wondered where her good manners had gone.  All the
courtesy, all the gentleness Ellen had striven to instill in her
had fallen away from her as quickly as leaves fall from trees in
the first chill wind of autumn.

Time and again, Ellen had said:  "Be firm but be gentle with
inferiors, especially darkies."  But if she was gentle the darkies
would sit in the kitchen all day, talking endlessly about the good
old days when a house nigger wasn't supposed to do a field hand's
work.

"Love and cherish your sisters.  Be kind to the afflicted," said
Ellen.  "Show tenderness to those in sorrow and in trouble."

She couldn't love her sisters now.  They were simply a dead weight
on her shoulders.  And as for cherishing them, wasn't she bathing
them, combing their hair and feeding them, even at the expense of
walking miles every day to find vegetables?  Wasn't she learning to
milk the cow, even though her heart was always in her throat when
that fearsome animal shook its horns at her?  And as for being
kind, that was a waste of time.  If she was overly kind to them,
they'd probably prolong their stay in bed, and she wanted them on
their feet again as soon as possible, so there would be four more
hands to help her.

They were convalescing slowly and lay scrawny and weak in their
bed.  While they had been unconscious, the world had changed.  The
Yankees had come, the darkies had gone and Mother had died.  Here
were three unbelievable happenings and their minds could not take
them in.  Sometimes they believed they must still be delirious and
these things had not happened at all.  Certainly Scarlett was so
changed she couldn't be real.  When she hung over the foot of their
bed and outlined the work she expected them to do when they
recovered, they looked at her as if she were a hobgoblin.  It was
beyond their comprehension that they no longer had a hundred slaves
to do the work.  It was beyond their comprehension that an O'Hara
lady should do manual labor.

"But, Sister," said Carreen, her sweet childish face blank with
consternation.  "I couldn't split kindling!  It would ruin my
hands!"

"Look at mine," answered Scarlett with a frightening smile as she
pushed blistered and calloused palms toward her.

"I think you are hateful to talk to Baby and me like this!" cried
Suellen.  "I think you are lying and trying to frighten us.  If
Mother were only here, she wouldn't let you talk to us like this!
Split kindling, indeed!"

Suellen looked with weak loathing at her older sister, feeling sure
Scarlett said these things just to be mean.  Suellen had nearly
died and she had lost her mother and she was lonely and scared and
she wanted to be petted and made much of.  Instead, Scarlett looked
over the foot of the bed each day, appraising their improvement
with a hateful new gleam in her slanting green eyes and talked
about making beds, preparing food, carrying water buckets and
splitting kindling.  And she looked as if she took a pleasure in
saying such awful things.

Scarlett did take pleasure in it.  She bullied the negroes and
harrowed the feelings of her sisters not only because she was too
worried and strained and tired to do otherwise but because it
helped her to forget her own bitterness that everything her mother
had told her about life was wrong.

Nothing her mother had taught her was of any value whatsoever now
and Scarlett's heart was sore and puzzled.  It did not occur to her
that Ellen could not have foreseen the collapse of the civilization
in which she raised her daughters, could not have anticipated the
disappearings of the places in society for which she trained them
so well.  It did not occur to her that Ellen had looked down a
vista of placid future years, all like the uneventful years of her
own life, when she had taught her to be gentle and gracious,
honorable and kind, modest and truthful.  Life treated women well
when they had learned those lessons, said Ellen.

Scarlett thought in despair:  "Nothing, no, nothing, she taught me
is of any help to me!  What good will kindness do me now?  What
value is gentleness?  Better that I'd learned to plow or chop
cotton like a darky.  Oh, Mother, you were wrong!"

She did not stop to think that Ellen's ordered world was gone and a
brutal world had taken its place, a world wherein every standard,
every value had changed.  She only saw, or thought she saw, that
her mother had been wrong, and she changed swiftly to meet this new
world for which she was not prepared.

Only her feeling for Tara had not changed.  She never came wearily
home across the fields and saw the sprawling white house that her
heart did not swell with love and the joy of homecoming.  She never
looked out of her window at green pastures and red fields and tall
tangled swamp forest that a sense of beauty did not fill her.  Her
love for this land with its softly rolling hills of bright-red
soil, this beautiful red earth that was blood colored, garnet,
brick dust, vermilion, which so miraculously grew green bushes
starred with white puffs, was one part of Scarlett which did not
change when all else was changing.  Nowhere else in the world was
there land like this.

When she looked at Tara she could understand, in part, why wars
were fought.  Rhett was wrong when he said men fought wars for
money.  No, they fought for swelling acres, softly furrowed by the
plow, for pastures green with stubby cropped grass, for lazy yellow
rivers and white houses that were cool amid magnolias.  These were
the only things worth fighting for, the red earth which was theirs
and would be their sons', the red earth which would bear cotton for
their sons and their sons' sons.

The trampled acres of Tara were all that was left to her, now that
Mother and Ashley were gone, now that Gerald was senile from shock,
and money and darkies and security and position had vanished
overnight.  As from another world she remembered a conversation
with her father about the land and wondered how she could have been
so young, so ignorant, as not to understand what he meant when he
said that the land was the one thing in the world worth fighting
for.

"For 'tis the only thing in the world that lasts . . . and to
anyone with a drop of Irish blood in them the land they live on is
like their mother. . . .  'Tis the only thing worth working for,
fighting for, dying for."

Yes, Tara was worth fighting for, and she accepted simply and
without question the fight.  No one was going to get Tara away from
her.  No one was going to set her and her people adrift on the
charity of relatives.  She would hold Tara, if she had to break the
back of every person on it.



CHAPTER XXVI


Scarlett had been at Tara two weeks since her return from Atlanta
when the largest blister on her foot began to fester, swelling
until it was impossible for her to put on her shoe or do more than
hobble about on her heel.  Desperation plucked at her when she
looked at the angry sore on her toe.  Suppose it should gangrene
like the soldiers' wounds and she should die, far away from a
doctor?  Bitter as life was now, she had no desire to leave it.
And who would look after Tara if she should die?

She had hoped when she first came home that Gerald's old spirit
would revive and he would take command, but in these two weeks that
hope had vanished.  She knew now that, whether she liked it or not,
she had the plantation and all its people on her two inexperienced
hands, for Gerald still sat quietly, like a man in a dream, so
frighteningly absent from Tara, so gentle.  To her pleas for advice
he gave as his only answer:  "Do what you think best, Daughter."
Or worse still, "Consult with your mother, Puss."

He never would be any different and now Scarlett realized the truth
and accepted it without emotion--that until he died Gerald would
always be waiting for Ellen, always listening for her.  He was in
some dim borderline country where time was standing still and Ellen
was always in the next room.  The mainspring of his existence was
taken away when she died and with it had gone his bounding
assurance, his impudence and his restless vitality.  Ellen was the
audience before which the blustering drama of Gerald O'Hara had
been played.  Now the curtain had been rung down forever, the
footlights dimmed and the audience suddenly vanished, while the
stunned old actor remained on his empty stage, waiting for his
cues.

That morning the house was still, for everyone except Scarlett,
Wade and the three sick girls was in the swamp hunting the sow.
Even Gerald had aroused a little and stumped off across the
furrowed fields, one hand on Pork's arm and a coil of rope in the
other.  Suellen and Careen had cried themselves to sleep, as they
did at least twice a day when they thought of Ellen, tears of grief
and weakness oozing down their sunken cheeks.  Melanie, who had
been propped up on pillows for the first time that day, lay covered
with a mended sheet between two babies, the downy flaxen head of
one cuddled in her arm, the kinky black head of Dilcey's child held
as gently in the other.  Wade sat at the bottom of the bed,
listening to a fairy story.

To Scarlett, the stillness at Tara was unbearable, for it reminded
her too sharply of the deathlike stillness of the desolate country
through which she had passed that long day on her way home from
Atlanta.  The cow and the calf had made no sound for hours.  There
were no birds twittering outside her window and even the noisy
family of mockers who had lived among the harshly rustling leaves
of the magnolia for generations had no song that day.  She had
drawn a low chair close to the open window of her bedroom, looking
out on the front drive, the lawn and the empty green pasture across
the road, and she sat with her skirts well above her knees and her
chin resting on her arms on the window sill.  There was a bucket of
well water on the floor beside her and every now and then she
lowered her blistered foot into it, screwing up her face at the
stinging sensation.

Fretting, she dug her chin into her arm.  Just when she needed her
strength most, this toe had to fester.  Those fools would never
catch the sow.  It had taken them a week to capture the pigs, one
by one, and now after two weeks the sow was still at liberty.
Scarlett knew that if she were just there in the swamp with them,
she could tuck up her dress to her knees and take the rope and
lasso the sow before you could say Jack Robinson.

But even after the sow was caught--if she were caught?  What then,
after she and her litter were eaten?  Life would go on and so would
appetites.  Winter was coming and there would be no food, not even
the poor remnants of the vegetables from the neighbors' gardens.
They must have dried peas and sorghum and meal and rice and--and--
oh, so many things.  Corn and cotton seed for next spring's
planting, and new clothes too.  Where was it all to come from and
how would she pay for it?

She had privately gone through Gerald's pockets and his cash box
and all she could find was stacks of Confederate bonds and three
thousand dollars in Confederate bills.  That was about enough to
buy one square meal for them all, she thought ironically, now that
Confederate money was worth almost less than nothing at all.  But
if she did have money and could find food, how would she haul it
home to Tara?  Why had God let the old horse die?  Even that sorry
animal Rhett had stolen would make all the difference in the world
to them.  Oh, those fine sleek mules which used to kick up their
heels in the pasture across the road, and the handsome carriage
horses, her little mare, the girls' ponies and Gerald's big
stallion racing about and tearing up the turf--  Oh, for one of
them, even the balkiest mule!

But, no matter--when her foot healed she would walk to Jonesboro.
It would be the longest walk she had ever taken in her life, but
walk it she would.  Even if the Yankees had burned the town
completely, she would certainly find someone in the neighborhood
who could tell her where to get food.  Wade's pinched face rose up
before her eyes.  He didn't like yams, he repeated; wanted a
drumstick and some rice and gravy.

The bright sunlight in the front yard suddenly clouded and the
trees blurred through tears.  Scarlett dropped her head on her arms
and struggled not to cry.  Crying was so useless now.  The only
time crying ever did any good was when there was a man around from
whom you wished favors.  As she crouched there, squeezing her eyes
tightly to keep back the tears, she was startled by the sound of
trotting hooves.  But she did not raise her head.  She had imagined
that sound too often in the nights and days of these last two
weeks, just as she had imagined she heard the rustle of Ellen's
skirts.  Her heart hammered, as it always did at such moments,
before she told herself sternly:  "Don't be a fool."

But the hooves slowed down in a startlingly natural way to the
rhythm of a walk and there was the measured scrunch-scrunch on the
gravel.  It was a horse--the Tarletons, the Fontaines!  She looked
up quickly.  It was a Yankee cavalryman.

Automatically, she dodged behind the curtain and peered fascinated
at him through the dim folds of the cloth, so startled that the
breath went out of her lungs with a gasp.

He sat slouched in the saddle, a thick, rough-looking man with an
unkempt black beard straggling over his unbuttoned blue jacket.
Little close-set eyes, squinting in the sun glare, calmly surveyed
the house from beneath the visor of his tight blue cap.  As he
slowly dismounted and tossed the bridle reins over the hitching
post, Scarlett's breath came back to her as suddenly and painfully
as after a blow in the stomach.  A Yankee, a Yankee with a long
pistol on his hip!  And she was alone in the house with three sick
girls and the babies!

As he lounged up the walk, hand on holster, beady little eyes
glancing to right and left, a kaleidoscope of jumbled pictures spun
in her mind, stories Aunt Pittypat had whispered of attacks on
unprotected women, throat cuttings, houses burned over the heads of
dying women, children bayoneted because they cried, all of the
unspeakable horrors that lay bound up in the name of "Yankee."

Her first terrified impulse was to hide in the closet, crawl under
the bed, fly down the back stairs and run screaming to the swamp,
anything to escape him.  Then she heard his cautious feet on the
front steps and his stealthy tread as he entered the hall and she
knew that escape was cut off.  Too cold with fear to move, she
heard his progress from room to room downstairs, his steps growing
louder and bolder as he discovered no one.  Now he was in the
dining room and in a moment he would walk out into the kitchen.

At the thought of the kitchen, rage suddenly leaped up in
Scarlett's breast, so sharply that it jabbed at her heart like a
knife thrust, and fear fell away before her overpowering fury.  The
kitchen!  There, over the open kitchen fire were two pots, one
filled with apples stewing and the other with a hodgepodge of
vegetables brought painfully from Twelve Oaks and the MacIntosh
garden--dinner that must serve for nine hungry people and hardly
enough for two.  Scarlett had been restraining her appetite for
hours, waiting for the return of the others and the thought of the
Yankee eating their meager meal made her shake with anger.

God damn them all!  They descended like locusts and left Tara to
starve slowly and now they were back again to steal the poor
leavings.  Her empty stomach writhed within her.  By God, this was
one Yankee who would do no more stealing!

She slipped off her worn shoe and, barefooted, she pattered swiftly
to the bureau, not even feeling her festered toe.  She opened the
top drawer soundlessly and caught up the heavy pistol she had
brought from Atlanta, the weapon Charles had worn but never fired.
She fumbled in the leather box that hung on the wall below his
saber and brought out a cap.  She slipped it into place with a hand
that did not shake.  Quickly and noiselessly, she ran into the
upper hall and down the stairs, steadying herself on the banisters
with one hand and holding the pistol close to her thigh in the
folds of her skirt.

"Who's there?" cried a nasal voice and she stopped on the middle of
the stairs, the blood thudding in her ears so loudly she could
hardly hear him.  "Halt or I'll shoot!" came the voice.

He stood in the door of the dining room, crouched tensely, his
pistol in one hand and, in the other, the small rosewood sewing box
fitted with gold thimble, gold-handled scissors and tiny gold-
topped acorn of emery.  Scarlett's legs felt cold to the knees but
rage scorched her face.  Ellen's sewing box in his hands.  She
wanted to cry:  "Put it down!  Put it down, you dirty--" but words
would not come.  She could only stare over the banisters at him and
watch his face change from harsh tenseness to a half-contemptuous,
half-ingratiating smile.

"So there is somebody ter home," he said, slipping his pistol back
into its holster and moving into the hall until he stood directly
below her.  "All alone, little lady?"

Like lightning, she shoved her weapon over the banisters and into
the startled bearded face.  Before he could even fumble at his
belt, she pulled the trigger.  The back kick of the pistol made her
reel, as the roar of the explosion filled her ears and the acrid
smoke stung her nostrils.  The man crashed backwards to the floor,
sprawling into the dining room with a violence that shook the
furniture.  The box clattered from his hand, the contents spilling
about him.  Hardly aware that she was moving, Scarlett ran down the
stairs and stood over him, gazing down into what was left of the
face above the beard, a bloody pit where the nose had been, glazing
eyes burned with powder.  As she looked, two streams of blood crept
across the shining floor, one from his face and one from the back
of his head.

Yes, he was dead.  Undoubtedly.  She had killed a man.

The smoke curled slowly to the ceiling and the red streams widened
about her feet.  For a timeless moment she stood there and in the
still hot hush of the summer morning every irrelevant sound and
scent seemed magnified, the quick thudding of her heart, like a
drumbeat, the slight rough rustling of the magnolia leaves, the
far-off plaintive sound of a swamp bird and the sweet smell of the
flowers outside the window.

She had killed a man, she who took care never to be in at the kill
on a hunt, she who could not bear the squealing of a hog at
slaughter or the squeak of a rabbit in a snare.  Murder! she
thought dully.  I've done murder.  Oh, this can't be happening to
me!  Her eyes went to the stubby hairy hand on the floor so close
to the sewing box and suddenly she was vitally alive again, vitally
glad with a cool tigerish joy.  She could have ground her heel into
the gaping wound which had been his nose and taken sweet pleasure
in the feel of his warm blood on her bare feet.  She had struck a
blow of revenge for Tara--and for Ellen.

There were hurried stumbling steps in the upper hall, a pause and
then more steps, weak dragging steps now, punctuated by metallic
clankings.  A sense of time and reality coming back to her,
Scarlett looked up and saw Melanie at the top of the stairs, clad
only in the ragged chemise which served her as a nightgown, her
weak arm weighed down with Charles' saber.  Melanie's eyes took in
the scene below in its entirety, the sprawling blue-clad body in
the red pool, the sewing box beside him, Scarlett, barefooted and
gray-faced, clutching the long pistol.

In silence her eyes met Scarlett's.  There was a glow of grim pride
in her usually gentle face, approbation and a fierce joy in her
smile that equaled the fiery tumult in Scarlett's own bosom.

"Why--why--she's like me!  She understands how I feel!" thought
Scarlett in that long moment.  "She'd have done the same thing!"

With a thrill she looked up at the frail swaying girl for whom she
had never had any feelings but of dislike and contempt.  Now,
struggling against hatred for Ashley's wife, there surged a feeling
of admiration and comradeship.  She saw in a flash of clarity
untouched by any petty emotion that beneath the gentle voice and
the dovelike eyes of Melanie there was a thin flashing blade of
unbreakable steel, felt too that there were banners and bugles of
courage in Melanie's quiet blood.

"Scarlett!  Scarlett!" shrilled the weak frightened voices of
Suellen and Carreen, muffled by their closed door, and Wade's voice
screamed "Auntee!  Auntee!"  Swiftly Melanie put her finger to her
lips and, laying the sword on the top step, she painfully made her
way down the upstairs hall and opened the door of the sick room.

"Don't be scared, chickens!" came her voice with teasing gaiety.
"Your big sister was trying to clean the rust off Charles' pistol
and it went off and nearly scared her to death!" . . .  "Now, Wade
Hampton, Mama just shot off your dear Papa's pistol!  When you are
bigger, she will let you shoot it."

"What a cool liar!" thought Scarlett with admiration.  "I couldn't
have thought that quickly.  But why lie?  They've got to know I've
done it."

She looked down at the body again and now revulsion came over her
as her rage and fright melted away, and her knees began to quiver
with the reaction.  Melanie dragged herself to the top step again
and started down, holding onto the banisters, her pale lower lip
caught between her teeth.

"Go back to bed, silly, you'll kill yourself!" Scarlett cried, but
the half-naked Melanie made her painful way down into the lower
hall.

"Scarlett," she whispered, "we must get him out of here and bury
him.  He may not be alone and if they find him here--"  She
steadied herself on Scarlett's arm.

"He must be alone," said Scarlett.  "I didn't see anyone else from
the upstairs window.  He must be a deserter."

"Even if he is alone, no one must know about it.  The negroes might
talk and then they'd come and get you.  Scarlett, we must get him
hidden before the folks come back from the swamp."

Her mind prodded to action by the feverish urgency of Melanie's
voice, Scarlett thought hard.

"I could bury him in the corner of the garden under the arbor--the
ground is soft there where Pork dug up the whisky barrel.  But how
will I get him there?"

"We'll both take a leg and drag him," said Melanie firmly.

Reluctantly, Scarlett's admiration went still higher.

"You couldn't drag a cat.  I'll drag him," she said roughly.  "You
go back to bed.  You'll kill yourself.  Don't dare try to help me
either or I'll carry you upstairs myself."

Melanie's white face broke into a sweet understanding smile.  "You
are very dear, Scarlett," she said and softly brushed her lips
against Scarlett's cheek.  Before Scarlett could recover from her
surprise, Melanie went on:  "If you can drag him out, I'll mop up
the--the mess before the folks get home, and Scarlett--"

"Yes?"

"Do you suppose it would be dishonest to go through his knapsack?
He might have something to eat."

"I do not," said Scarlett, annoyed that she had not thought of this
herself.  "You take the knapsack and I'll go through his pockets."

Stooping over the dead man with distaste, she unbuttoned the
remaining buttons of his jacket and systematically began rifling
his pockets.

"Dear God," she whispered, pulling out a bulging wallet, wrapped
about with a rag.  "Melanie--Melly, I think it's full of money!"

Melanie said nothing but abruptly sat down on the floor and leaned
back against the wall.

"You look," she said shakily.  "I'm feeling a little weak."

Scarlett tore off the rag and with trembling hands opened the
leather folds.

"Look, Melly--just look!"

Melanie looked and her eyes dilated.  Jumbled together was a mass
of bills, United States greenbacks mingling with Confederate money
and, glinting from between them, were one ten-dollar gold piece and
two five-dollar gold pieces.

"Don't stop to count it now," said Melanie as Scarlett began
fingering the bills.  "We haven't time--"

"Do you realize, Melanie, that this money means that we'll eat?"

"Yes, yes, dear.  I know but we haven't time now.  You look in his
other pockets and I'll take the knapsack."

Scarlett was loath to put down the wallet.  Bright vistas opened
before her--real money, the Yankee's horse, food!  There was a God
after all, and He did provide, even if He did take very odd ways of
providing.  She sat on her haunches and stared at the wallet
smiling.  Food!  Melanie plucked it from her hands--

"Hurry!" she said.

The trouser pockets yielded nothing except a candle end, a
jackknife, a plug of tobacco and a bit of twine.  Melanie removed
from the knapsack a small package of coffee which she sniffed as if
it were the sweetest of perfumes, hardtack and, her face changing,
a miniature of a little girl in a gold frame set with seed pearls,
a garnet brooch, two broad gold bracelets with tiny dangling gold
chains, a gold thimble, a small silver baby's cup, gold embroidery
scissors, a diamond solitaire ring and a pair of earrings with
pendant pear-shaped diamonds, which even their unpracticed eyes
could tell were well over a carat each.

"A thief!" whispered Melanie, recoiling from the still body.
"Scarlett, he must have stolen all of this!"

"Of course," said Scarlett.  "And he came here hoping to steal more
from us."

"I'm glad you killed him," said Melanie her gentle eyes hard.  "Now
hurry, darling, and get him out of here."

Scarlett bent over, caught the dead man by his boots and tugged.
How heavy he was and how weak she suddenly felt.  Suppose she
shouldn't be able to move him?  Turning so that she backed the
corpse, she caught a heavy boot under each arm and threw her weight
forward.  He moved and she jerked again.  Her sore foot, forgotten
in the excitement, now gave a tremendous throb that made her grit
her teeth and shift her weight to the heel.  Tugging and straining,
perspiration dripping from her forehead, she dragged him down the
hall, a red stain following her path.

"If he bleeds across the yard, we can't hide it," she gasped.
"Give me your shimmy, Melanie, and I'll wad it around his head."

Melanie's white face went crimson.

"Don't be silly, I won't look at you," said Scarlett.  "If I had on
a petticoat or pantalets I'd use them."

Crouching back against the wall, Melanie pulled the ragged linen
garment over her head and silently tossed it to Scarlett, shielding
herself as best she could with her arms.

"Thank God, I'm not that modest," thought Scarlett, feeling rather
than seeing Melanie's agony of embarrassment, as she wrapped the
ragged cloth about the shattered face.

By a series of limping jerks, she pulled the body down the hall
toward the back porch and, pausing to wipe her forehead with the
back of her hand, glanced back toward Melanie, sitting against the
wall hugging her thin knees to her bare breasts.  How silly of
Melanie to be bothering about modesty at a time like this, Scarlett
thought irritably.  It was just part of her nicey-nice way of
acting which had always made Scarlett despise her.  Then shame rose
in her.  After all--after all, Melanie had dragged herself from bed
so soon after having a baby and had come to her aid with a weapon
too heavy even for her to lift.  That had taken courage, the kind
of courage Scarlett honestly knew she herself did not possess, the
thin-steel, spun-silk courage which had characterized Melanie on
the terrible night Atlanta fell and on the long trip home.  It was
the same intangible, unspectacular courage that all the Wilkeses
possessed, a quality which Scarlett did not understand but to which
she gave grudging tribute.

"Go back to bed," she threw over her shoulder.  "You'll be dead if
you don't.  I'll clean up the mess after I've buried him."

"I'll do it with one of the rag rugs," whispered Melanie, looking
at the pool of blood with a sick face.

"Well, kill yourself then and see if I care!  And if any of the
folks come back before I'm finished, keep them in the house and
tell them the horse just walked in from nowhere."

Melanie sat shivering in the morning sunlight and covered her ears
against the sickening series of thuds as the dead man's head bumped
down the porch steps.

No one questioned whence the horse had come.  It was so obvious he
was a stray from the recent battle and they were well pleased to
have him.  The Yankee lay in the shallow pit Scarlett had scraped
out under the scuppernong arbor.  The uprights which held the thick
vines were rotten and that night Scarlett hacked at them with the
kitchen knife until they fell and the tangled mass ran wild over
the grave.  The replacing of these posts was one bit of repair work
Scarlett did not suggest and, if the negroes knew why, they kept
their silence.

No ghost rose from that shallow grave to haunt her in the long
nights when she lay awake, too tired to sleep.  No feeling of
horror or remorse assailed her at the memory.  She wondered why,
knowing that even a month before she could never have done the
deed.  Pretty young Mrs. Hamilton, with her dimple and her jingling
earbobs and her helpless little ways, blowing a man's face to a
pulp and then burying him in a hastily scratched-out hole!
Scarlett grinned a little grimly thinking of the consternation such
an idea would bring to those who knew her.

"I won't think about it any more," she decided.  "It's over and
done with and I'd have been a ninny not to kill him.  I reckon--I
reckon I must have changed a little since coming home or else I
couldn't have done it."

She did not think of it consciously but in the back of her mind,
whenever she was confronted by an unpleasant and difficult task,
the idea lurked giving her strength:  "I've done murder and so I
can surely do this."

She had changed more than she knew and the shell of hardness which
had begun to form about her heart when she lay in the slave garden
at Twelve Oaks was slowly thickening.



Now that she had a horse, Scarlett could find out for herself what
had happened to their neighbors.  Since she came home she had
wondered despairingly a thousand times:  "Are we the only folks
left in the County?  Has everybody else been burned out?  Have they
all refugeed to Macon?"  With the memory of the ruins of Twelve
Oaks, the MacIntosh place and the Slattery shack fresh in her mind,
she almost dreaded to discover the truth.  But it was better to
know the worst than to wonder.  She decided to ride to the
Fontaines' first, not because they were the nearest neighbors but
because old Dr. Fontaine might be there.  Melanie needed a doctor.
She was not recovering as she should and Scarlett was frightened by
her white weakness.

So on the first day when her foot had healed enough to stand a
slipper, she mounted the Yankee's horse.  One foot in the shortened
stirrup and the other leg crooked about the pommel in an
approximation of a side saddle, she set out across the fields
toward Mimosa, steeling herself to find it burned.

To her surprise and pleasure, she saw the faded yellow-stucco house
standing amid the mimosa trees, looking as it had always looked.
Warm happiness, happiness that almost brought tears, flooded her
when the three Fontaine women came out of the house to welcome her
with kisses and cries of joy.

But when the first exclamations of affectionate greeting were over
and they all had trooped into the dining room to sit down, Scarlett
felt a chill.  The Yankees had not reached Mimosa because it was
far off the main road.  And so the Fontaines still had their stock
and their provisions, but Mimosa was held by the same strange
silence that hung over Tara, over the whole countryside.  All the
slaves except four women house servants had run away, frightened by
the approach of the Yankees.  There was not a man on the place
unless Sally's little boy, Joe, hardly out of diapers, could be
counted as a man.  Alone in the big house were Grandma Fontaine, in
her seventies, her daughter-in-law who would always be known as
Young Miss, though she was in her fifties, and Sally, who had
barely turned twenty.  They were far away from neighbors and
unprotected, but if they were afraid it did not show on their
faces.  Probably, thought Scarlett, because Sally and Young Miss
were too afraid of the porcelain-frail but indomitable old Grandma
to dare voice any qualms.  Scarlett herself was afraid of the old
lady, for she had sharp eyes and a sharper tongue and Scarlett had
felt them both in the past.

Though unrelated by blood and far apart in age, there was a kinship
of spirit and experience binding these women together.  All three
wore home-dyed mourning, all were worn, sad, worried, all bitter
with a bitterness that did not sulk or complain but, nevertheless,
peered out from behind their smiles and their words of welcome.
For their slaves were gone, their money was worthless, Sally's
husband, Joe, had died at Gettysburg and Young Miss was also a
widow, for young Dr. Fontaine had died of dysentery at Vicksburg.
The other two boys, Alex and Tony, were somewhere in Virginia and
nobody knew whether they were alive or dead; and old Dr. Fontaine
was off somewhere with Wheeler's cavalry.

"And the old fool is seventy-three years old though he tries to act
younger and he's as full of rheumatism as a hog is of fleas," said
Grandma, proud of her husband, the light in her eyes belying her
sharp words.

"Have you all had any news of what's been happening in Atlanta?"
asked Scarlett when they were comfortably settled.  "We're
completely buried at Tara."

"Law, child," said Old Miss, taking charge of the conversation, as
was her habit, "we're in the same fix as you are.  We don't know a
thing except that Sherman finally got the town."

"So he did get it.  What's he doing now?  Where's the fighting
now?"

"And how would three lone women out here in the country know about
the war when we haven't seen a letter or a newspaper in weeks?" said
the old lady tartly.  "One of our darkies talked to a darky who'd
seen a darky who'd been to Jonesboro, and except for that we
haven't heard anything.  What they said was that the Yankees were
just squatting in Atlanta resting up their men and their horses,
but whether it's true or not you're as good a judge as I am.  Not
that they wouldn't need a rest, after the fight we gave them."

"To think you've been at Tara all this time and we didn't know!"
Young Miss broke in.  "Oh, how I blame myself for not riding over
to see!  But there's been so much to do here with most all the
darkies gone that I just couldn't get away.  But I should have made
time to go.  It wasn't neighborly of me.  But, of course, we
thought the Yankees had burned Tara like they did Twelve Oaks and
the MacIntosh house and that your folks had gone to Macon.  And we
never dreamed you were home, Scarlett."

"Well, how were we to know different when Mr. O'Hara's darkies came
through here so scared they were popeyed and told us the Yankees
were going to burn Tara?" Grandma interrupted.

"And we could see--" Sally began.

"I'm telling this, please," said Old Miss shortly.  "And they said
the Yankees were camped all over Tara and your folks were fixing to
go to Macon.  And then that night we saw the glare of fire over
toward Tara and it lasted for hours and it scared our fool darkies
so bad they all ran off.  What burned?"

"All our cotton--a hundred and fifty thousand dollars worth," said
Scarlett bitterly.

"Be thankful it wasn't your house," said Grandma, leaning her chin
on her cane.  "You can always grow more cotton and you can't grow a
house.  By the bye, had you all started picking your cotton?"

"No," said Scarlett, "and now most of it is ruined.  I don't
imagine there's more than three bales left standing, in the far
field in the creek bottom, and what earthly good will it do?  All
our field hands are gone and there's nobody to pick it."

"Mercy me, all our field hands are gone and there's nobody to pick
it!" mimicked Grandma and bent a satiric glance on Scarlett.
"What's wrong with your own pretty paws, Miss, and those of your
sisters?"

"Me?  Pick cotton?" cried Scarlett aghast, as if Grandma had been
suggesting some repulsive crime.  "Like a field hand?  Like white
trash?  Like the Slattery women?"

"White trash, indeed!  Well, isn't this generation soft and
ladylike!  Let me tell you, Miss, when I was a girl my father lost
all his money and I wasn't above doing honest work with my hands
and in the fields too, till Pa got enough money to buy some more
darkies.  I've hoed my row and I've picked my cotton and I can do
it again if I have to.  And it looks like I'll have to.  White
trash, indeed!"

"Oh, but Mama Fontaine," cried her daughter-in-law, casting
imploring glances at the two girls, urging them to help her smooth
the old lady's feathers.  "That was so long ago, a different day
entirely, and times have changed."

"Times never change when there's a need for honest work to be
done," stated the sharp-eyed old lady, refusing to be soothed.
"And I'm ashamed for your mother, Scarlett, to hear you stand there
and talk as though honest work made white trash out of nice people.
'When Adam delved and Eve span'--"

To change the subject, Scarlett hastily questioned:  "What about
the Tarletons and the Calverts?  Were they burned out?  Have they
refugeed to Macon?"

"The Yankees never got to the Tarletons.  They're off the main
road, like we are, but they did get to the Calverts and they stole
all their stock and poultry and got all the darkies to run off with
them--" Sally began.

Grandma interrupted.

"Hah!  They promised all the black wenches silk dresses and gold
earbobs--that's what they did.  And Cathleen Calvert said some of
the troopers went off with the black fools behind them on their
saddles.  Well, all they'll get will be yellow babies and I can't
say that Yankee blood will improve the stock."

"Oh, Mama Fontaine!"

"Don't pull such a shocked face, Jane.  We're all married, aren't
we?  And, God knows, we've seen mulatto babies before this."

"Why didn't they burn the Calverts' house?"

"The house was saved by the combined accents of the second Mrs.
Calvert and that Yankee overseer of hers, Hilton," said Old Miss,
who always referred to the ex-governess as the "second Mrs.
Calvert," although the first Mrs. Calvert had been dead twenty
years.

"'We are staunch Union sympathizers,'" mimicked the old lady,
twanging the words through her long thin nose.  "Cathleen said the
two of them swore up hill and down dale that the whole passel of
Calverts were Yankees.  And Mr. Calvert dead in the Wilderness!
And Raiford at Gettysburg and Cade in Virginia with the army!
Cathleen was so mortified she said she'd rather the house had been
burned.  She said Cade would bust when he came home and heard about
it.  But then, that's what a man gets for marrying a Yankee woman--
no pride, no decency, always thinking about their own skins. . . .
How come they didn't burn Tara, Scarlett?"

For a moment Scarlett paused before answering.  She knew the very
next question would be:  "And how are all your folks?  And how is
your dear mother?"  She knew she could not tell them Ellen was
dead.  She knew that if she spoke those words or even let herself
think of them in the presence of these sympathetic women, she would
burst into a storm of tears and cry until she was sick.  And she
could not let herself cry.  She had not really cried since she came
home and she knew that if she once let down the floodgates, her
closely husbanded courage would all be gone.  But she knew, too,
looking with confusion at the friendly faces about her, that if she
withheld the news of Ellen's death, the Fontaines would never
forgive her.  Grandma in particular was devoted to Ellen and there
were very few people in the County for whom the old lady gave a
snap of her skinny fingers.

"Well, speak up," said Grandma, looking sharply at her.  "Don't you
know, Miss?"

"Well, you see, I didn't get home till the day after the battle,"
she answered hastily.  "The Yankees were all gone then.  Pa--Pa
told me that--that he got them not to burn the house because
Suellen and Carreen were so ill with typhoid they couldn't be
moved."

"That's the first time I ever heard of a Yankee doing a decent
thing," said Grandma, as if she regretted hearing anything good
about the invaders.  "And how are the girls now?"

"Oh, they are better, much better, almost well but quite weak,"
answered Scarlett.  Then, seeing the question she feared hovering
on the old lady's lips, she cast hastily about for some other topic
of conversation.

"I--I wonder if you could lend us something to eat?  The Yankees
cleaned us out like a swarm of locusts.  But, if you are on short
rations, just tell me so plainly and--"

"Send over Pork with a wagon and you shall have half of what we've
got, rice, meal, ham, some chickens," said Old Miss, giving
Scarlett a sudden keen look.

"Oh, that's too much!  Really, I--"

"Not a word!  I won't hear it.  What are neighbors for?"

"You are so kind that I can't--  But I have to be going now.  The
folks at home will be worrying about me."

Grandma rose abruptly and took Scarlett by the arm.

"You two stay here," she commanded, pushing Scarlett toward the
back porch.  "I have a private word for this child.  Help me down
the steps, Scarlett."

Young Miss and Sally said good-by and promised to come calling
soon.  They were devoured by curiosity as to what Grandma had to
say to Scarlett but unless she chose to tell them, they would never
know.  Old ladies were so difficult, Young Miss whispered to Sally
as they went back to their sewing.

Scarlett stood with her hand on the horse's bridle, a dull feeling
at her heart.

"Now," said Grandma, peering into her face, "what's wrong at Tara?
What are you keeping back?"

Scarlett looked up into the keen old eyes and knew she could tell
the truth, without tears.  No one could cry in the presence of
Grandma Fontaine without her express permission.

"Mother is dead," she said flatly.

The hand on her arm tightened until it pinched and the wrinkled
lids over the yellow eyes blinked.

"Did the Yankees kill her?"

"She died of typhoid.  Died--the day before I came home."

"Don't think about it," said Grandma sternly and Scarlett saw her
swallow.  "And your Pa?"

"Pa is--Pa is not himself."

"What do you mean?  Speak up.  Is he ill?"

"The shock--he is so strange--he is not--"

"Don't tell me he's not himself.  Do you mean his mind is
unhinged?"

It was a relief to hear the truth put so baldly.  How good the old
lady was to offer no sympathy that would make her cry.

"Yes," she said dully, "he's lost his mind.  He acts dazed and
sometimes he can't seem to remember that Mother is dead.  Oh, Old
Miss, it's more than I can stand to see him sit by the hour,
waiting for her and so patiently too, and he used to have no more
patience than a child.  But it's worse when he does remember that
she's gone.  Every now and then, after he's sat still with his ear
cocked listening for her, he jumps up suddenly and stumps out of
the house and down to the burying ground.  And then he comes
dragging back with the tears all over his face and he says over and
over till I could scream:  'Katie Scarlett, Mrs. O'Hara is dead.
Your mother is dead,' and it's just like I was hearing it again for
the first time.  And sometimes, late at night, I hear him calling
her and I get out of bed and go to him and tell him she's down at
the quarters with a sick darky.  And he fusses because she's always
tiring herself out nursing people.  And it's so hard to get him
back to bed.  He's like a child.  Oh, I wish Dr. Fontaine was here!
I know he could do something for Pa!  And Melanie needs a doctor
too.  She isn't getting over her baby like she should--"

"Melly--a baby?  And she's with you?"

"Yes."

"What's Melly doing with you?  Why isn't she in Macon with her aunt
and her kinfolks?  I never thought you liked her any too well,
Miss, for all she was Charles' sister.  Now, tell me all about it."

"It's a long story, Old Miss.  Don't you want to go back in the
house and sit down?"

"I can stand," said Grandma shortly.  "And if you told your story
in front of the others, they'd be bawling and making you feel sorry
for yourself.  Now, let's have it."

Scarlett began haltingly with the siege and Melanie's condition,
but as her story progressed beneath the sharp old eyes which never
faltered in their gaze, she found words, words of power and horror.
It all came back to her, the sickeningly hot day of the baby's
birth, the agony of fear, the flight and Rhett's desertion.  She
spoke of the wild darkness of the night, the blazing camp fires
which might be friends or foes, the gaunt chimneys which met her
gaze in the morning sun, the dead men and horses along the road,
the hunger, the desolation, the fear that Tara had been burned.

"I thought if I could just get home to Mother, she could manage
everything and I could lay down the weary load.  On the way home I
thought the worst had already happened to me, but when I knew she
was dead I knew what the worst really was."

She dropped her eyes to the ground and waited for Grandma to speak.
The silence was so prolonged she wondered if Grandma could have
failed to comprehend her desperate plight.  Finally the old voice
spoke and her tones were kind, kinder than Scarlett had ever heard
her use in addressing anyone.

"Child, it's a very bad thing for a woman to face the worst that
can happen to her, because after she's faced the worst she can't
ever really fear anything again.  And it's very bad for a woman not
to be afraid of something.  You think I don't understand what
you've told me--what you've been through?  Well, I understand very
well.  When I was about your age I was in the Creek uprising, right
after the Fort Mims massacre--yes," she said in a far-away voice,
"just about your age for that was fifty-odd years ago.  And I
managed to get into the bushes and hide and I lay there and saw our
house burn and I saw the Indians scalp my brothers and sisters.
And I could only lie there and pray that the light of the flames
wouldn't show up my hiding place.  And they dragged Mother out and
killed her about twenty feet from where I was lying.  And scalped
her too.  And ever so often one Indian would go back to her and
sink his tommyhawk into her skull again.  I--I was my mother's pet
and I lay there and saw it all.  And in the morning I set out for
the nearest settlement and it was thirty miles away.  It took me
three days to get there, through the swamps and the Indians, and
afterward they thought I'd lose my mind. . . .  That's where I met
Dr. Fontaine.  He looked after me. . . .  Ah, well, that's been
fifty years ago, as I said, and since that time I've never been
afraid of anything or anybody because I'd known the worst that
could happen to me.  And that lack of fear has gotten me into a lot
of trouble and cost me a lot of happiness.  God intended women to
be timid frightened creatures and there's something unnatural about
a woman who isn't afraid. . . .  Scarlett, always save something to
fear--even as you save something to love. . . ."

Her voice trailed off and she stood silent with eyes looking back
over half a century to the day when she had been afraid.  Scarlett
moved impatiently.  She had thought Grandma was going to understand
and perhaps show her some way to solve her problems.  But like all
old people she'd gotten to talking about things that happened
before anyone was born, things no one was interested in.  Scarlett
wished she had not confided in her.

"Well, go home, child, or they'll be worrying about you," she said
suddenly.  "Send Pork with the wagon this afternoon. . . .  And
don't think you can lay down the load, ever.  Because you can't.
I know."



Indian summer lingered into November that year and the warm days
were bright days for those at Tara.  The worst was over.  They had
a horse now and they could ride instead of walk.  They had fried
eggs for breakfast and fried ham for supper to vary the monotony of
the yams, peanuts and dried apples, and on one festal occasion they
even had roast chicken.  The old sow had finally been captured and
she and her brood rooted and grunted happily under the house where
they were penned.  Sometimes they squealed so loudly no one in the
house could talk but it was a pleasant sound.  It meant fresh pork
for the white folks and chitterlings for the negroes when cold
weather and hog-killing time should arrive, and it meant food for
the winter for all.

Scarlett's visit to the Fontaines had heartened her more than she
realized.  Just the knowledge that she had neighbors, that some of
the family friends and old homes had survived, drove out the
terrible loss and alone feeling which had oppressed her in her
first weeks at Tara.  And the Fontaines and Tarletons, whose
plantations had not been in the path of the army, were most
generous in sharing what little they had.  It was the tradition of
the County that neighbor helped neighbor and they refused to accept
a penny from Scarlett, telling her that she would do the same for
them and she could pay them back, in kind, next year when Tara was
again producing.

Scarlett now had food for her household, she had a horse, she had
the money and jewelry taken from the Yankee straggler, and the
greatest need was new clothing.  She knew it would be risky
business sending Pork south to buy clothes, when the horse might be
captured by either Yankees or Confederates.  But, at least, she had
the money with which to buy the clothes, a horse and wagon for the
trip, and perhaps Pork could make the trip without getting caught.
Yes, the worst was over.

Every morning when Scarlett arose she thanked God for the pale-blue
sky and the warm sun, for each day of good weather put off the
inevitable time when warm clothing would be needed.  And each warm
day saw more and more cotton piling up in the empty slave quarters,
the only storage place left on the plantation.  There was more
cotton in the fields than she or Pork had estimated, probably four
bales, and soon the cabins would be full.

Scarlett had not intended to do any cotton picking herself, even
after Grandma Fontaine's tart remark.  It was unthinkable that she,
an O'Hara lady, now the mistress of Tara, should work in the
fields.  It put her on the same level with the snarly haired Mrs.
Slattery and Emmie.  She had intended that the negroes should do
the field work, while she and the convalescent girls attended to
the house, but here she was confronted with a caste feeling even
stronger than her own.  Pork, Mammy and Prissy set up outcries at
the idea of working in the fields.  They reiterated that they were
house niggers, not field hands.  Mammy, in particular, declared
vehemently that she had never even been a yard nigger.  She had
been born in the Robillard great house, not in the quarters, and
had been raised in Ole Miss' bedroom, sleeping on a pallet at the
foot of the bed.  Dilcey alone said nothing and she fixed her
Prissy with an unwinking eye that made her squirm.

Scarlett refused to listen to the protests and drove them all into
the cotton rows.  But Mammy and Pork worked so slowly and with so
many lamentations that Scarlett sent Mammy back to the kitchen to
cook and Pork to the woods and the river with snares for rabbits
and possums and lines for fish.  Cotton picking was beneath Pork's
dignity but hunting and fishing were not.

Scarlett next had tried her sisters and Melanie in the fields, but
that had worked no better.  Melanie had picked neatly, quickly and
willingly for an hour in the hot sun and then fainted quietly and
had to stay in bed for a week.  Suellen, sullen and tearful,
pretended to faint too, but came back to consciousness spitting
like an angry cat when Scarlett poured a gourdful of water in her
face.  Finally she refused point-blank.

"I won't work in the fields like a darky!  You can't make me.  What
if any of our friends ever heard of it?  What if--if Mr. Kennedy
ever knew?  Oh, if Mother knew about this--"

"You just mention Mother's name once more, Suellen O'Hara, and I'll
slap you flat," cried Scarlett.  "Mother worked harder than any
darky on this place and you know it, Miss Fine Airs!"

"She did not!  At least, not in the fields.  And you can't make me.
I'll tell Papa on you and he won't make me work!"

"Don't you dare go bothering Pa with any of our troubles!" cried
Scarlett, distracted between indignation at her sister and fear for
Gerald.

"I'll help you, Sissy," interposed Carreen docilely.  "I'll work
for Sue and me too.  She isn't well yet and she shouldn't be out in
the sun."

Scarlett said gratefully:  "Thank you, Sugarbaby," but looked
worriedly at her younger sister.  Carreen, who had always been as
delicately pink and white as the orchard blossoms that are
scattered by the spring wind, was no longer pink but still conveyed
in her sweet thoughtful face a blossomlike quality.  She had been
silent, a little dazed since she came back to consciousness and
found Ellen gone, Scarlett a termagant, the world changed and
unceasing labor the order of the new day.  It was not in Carreen's
delicate nature to adjust herself to change.  She simply could not
comprehend what had happened and she went about Tara like a
sleepwalker, doing exactly what she was told.  She looked, and was,
frail but she was willing, obedient and obliging.  When she was not
doing Scarlett's bidding, her rosary beads were always in her hands
and her lips moving in prayers for her mother and for Brent
Tarleton.  It did not occur to Scarlett that Carreen had taken
Brent's death so seriously and that her grief was unhealed.  To
Scarlet, Carreen was still "baby sister," far too young to have had
a really serious love affair.

Scarlett, standing in the sun in the cotton rows, her back breaking
from the eternal bending and her hands roughened by the dry bolls,
wished she had a sister who combined Suellen's energy and strength
with Carreen's sweet disposition.  For Carreen picked diligently
and earnestly.  But, after she had labored for an hour it was
obvious that she, and not Suellen, was the one not yet well enough
for such work.  So Scarlett sent Carreen back to the house too.

There remained with her now in the long rows only Dilcey and
Prissy.  Prissy picked lazily, spasmodically, complaining of her
feet, her back, her internal miseries, her complete weariness,
until her mother took a cotton stalk to her and whipped her until
she screamed.  After that she worked a little better, taking care
to stay far from her mother's reach.

Dilcey worked tirelessly, silently, like a machine, and Scarlett,
with her back aching and her shoulder raw from the tugging weight
of the cotton bag she carried, thought that Dilcey was worth her
weight in gold.

"Dilcey," she said, "when good times come back, I'm not going to
forget how you've acted.  You've been mighty good."

The bronze giantess did not grin pleasedly or squirm under praise
like the other negroes.  She turned an immobile face to Scarlett
and said with dignity:  "Thankee, Ma'm.  But Mist' Gerald and Miss
Ellen been good to me.  Mist' Gerald buy my Prissy so I wouldn'
grieve and I doan forgit it.  I is part Indian and Indians doan
forgit them as is good to them.  I sorry 'bout my Prissy.  She
mighty wuthless.  Look lak she all nigger lak her pa.  Her pa was
mighty flighty."

In spite of Scarlett's problem of getting help from the others in
the picking and in spite of the weariness of doing the labor
herself, her spirits lifted as the cotton slowly made its way from
the fields to the cabins.  There was something about cotton that
was reassuring, steadying.  Tara had risen to riches on cotton,
even as the whole South had risen, and Scarlett was Southerner
enough to believe that both Tara and the South would rise again out
of the red fields.

Of course, this little cotton she had gathered was not much but it
was something.  It would bring a little in Confederate money and
that little would help her to save the hoarded greenbacks and gold
in the Yankee's wallet until they had to be spent.  Next spring
she would try to make the Confederate government send back Big
Sam and the other field hands they had commandeered, and if the
government wouldn't release them, she'd use the Yankee's money to
hire field hands from the neighbors.  Next spring, she would plant
and plant. . . .  She straightened her tired back and, looking over
the browning autumn fields, she saw next year's crop standing sturdy
and green, acre upon acre.

Next spring!  Perhaps by next spring the war would be over and good
times would be back.  And whether the Confederacy won or lost,
times would be better.  Anything was better than the constant
danger of raids from both armies.  When the war was over, a
plantation could earn an honest living.  Oh, if the war were only
over!  Then people could plant crops with some certainty of reaping
them!

There was hope now.  The war couldn't last forever.  She had her
little cotton, she had food, she had a horse, she had her small but
treasured hoard of money.  Yes, the worst was over!



CHAPTER XXVII


On a noonday in mid-November, they all sat grouped about the dinner
table, eating the last of the dessert concocted by Mammy from corn
meal and dried huckleberries, sweetened with sorghum.  There was a
chill in the air, the first chill of the year, and Pork, standing
behind Scarlett's chair, rubbed his hands together in glee and
questioned:  "Ain' it 'bout time fer de hawg killin', Miss
Scarlett?"

"You can taste those chitlins already, can't you?" said Scarlett
with a grin.  "Well, I can taste fresh pork myself and if the
weather holds for a few days more, we'll--"

Melanie interrupted, her spoon at her lips,

"Listen, dear!  Somebody's coming!"

"Somebody hollerin'," said Pork uneasily.

On the crisp autumn air came clear the sound of horse's hooves,
thudding as swiftly as a frightened heart, and a woman's voice,
high pitched, screaming:  "Scarlett!  Scarlett!"

Eye met eye for a dreadful second around the table before chairs
were pushed back and everyone leaped up.  Despite the fear that
made it shrill, they recognized the voice of Sally Fontaine who,
only an hour before, had stopped at Tara for a brief chat on her
way to Jonesboro.  Now, as they all rushed pell-mell to crowd the
front door, they saw her coming up the drive like the wind on a
lathered horse, her hair streaming behind her, her bonnet dangling
by its ribbons.  She did not draw rein but as she galloped madly
toward them, she waved her arm back in the direction from which she
had come.

"The Yankees are coming!  I saw them!  Down the road!  The Yankees--"

She sawed savagely at the horse's mouth just in time to swerve him
from leaping up the front steps.  He swung around sharply, covered
the side lawn in three leaps and she put him across the four-foot
hedge as if she were on the hunting field.  They heard the heavy
pounding of his hooves as he went through the back yard and down
the narrow lane between the cabins of the quarters and knew she was
cutting across the fields to Mimosa.

For a moment they stood paralyzed and then Suellen and Carreen
began to sob and clutch each other's fingers.  Little Wade stood
rooted, trembling, unable to cry.  What he had feared since the
night he left Atlanta had happened.  The Yankees were coming to get
him.

"Yankees?" said Gerald vaguely.  "But the Yankees have already been
here."

"Mother of God!" cried Scarlett, her eyes meeting Melanie's
frightened eyes.  For a swift instant there went through her memory
again the horrors of her last night in Atlanta, the ruined homes
that dotted the countryside, all the stories of rape and torture
and murder.  She saw again the Yankee soldier standing in the hall
with Ellen's sewing box in his hand.  She thought:  "I shall die.
I shall die right here.  I thought we were through with all that.
I shall die.  I can't stand any more."

Then her eyes fell on the horse saddled and hitched and waiting for
Pork to ride him to the Tarleton place on an errand.  Her horse!
Her only horse!  The Yankees would take him and the cow and the
calf.  And the sow and her litter--  Oh, how many tiring hours it
had taken to catch that sow and her agile young!  And they'd take
the rooster and the setting hens and the ducks the Fontaines had
given her.  And the apples and the yams in the pantry bins.  And
the flour and rice and dried peas.  And the money in the Yankee
soldier's wallet.  They'd take everything and leave them to starve.

"They shan't have them!" she cried aloud and they all turned
startled faces to her, fearful her mind had cracked under the
tidings.  "I won't go hungry!  They shan't have them!"

"What is it, Scarlett?  What is it?"

"The horse!  The cow!  The pigs!  They shan't have them!  I won't
let them have them!"

She turned swiftly to the four negroes who huddled in the doorway,
their black faces a peculiarly ashen shade.

"The swamp," she said rapidly.

"Whut swamp?"

"The river swamp, you fools!  Take the pigs to the swamp.  All of
you.  Quickly.  Pork, you and Prissy crawl under the house and get
the pigs out.  Suellen, you and Carreen fill the baskets with as
much food as you can carry and get to the woods.  Mammy, put the
silver in the well again.  And Pork!  Pork, listen to me, don't
stand there like that!  Take Pa with you.  Don't ask me where!
Anywhere!  Go with Pork, Pa.  That's a sweet pa."

Even in her frenzy she thought what the sight of bluecoats might do
to Gerald's wavering mind.  She stopped and wrung her hands and the
frightened sobbing of little Wade who was clutching Melanie's skirt
added to her panic.

"What shall I do, Scarlett?"  Melanie's voice was calm amid the
wailing and tears and scurrying feet.  Though her face was paper
white and her whole body trembled, the very quietness of her voice
steadied Scarlett, revealing to her that they all looked to her for
commands, for guidance.

"The cow and the calf," she said quickly.  "They're in the old
pasture.  Take the horse and drive them into the swamp and--"

Before she could finish her sentence, Melanie shook off Wade's
clutches and was down the front steps and running toward the horse,
pulling up her wide skirts as she ran.  Scarlett caught a flashing
glimpse of thin legs, a flurry of skirts and underclothing and
Melanie was in the saddle, her feet dangling far above the
stirrups.  She gathered up the reins and clapped her heels against
the animal's sides and then abruptly pulled him in, her face
twisting with horror.

"My baby!" she cried.  "Oh, my baby!  The Yankees will kill him!
Give him to me!"

Her hand was on the pommel and she was preparing to slide off but
Scarlett screamed at her.

"Go on!  Go on!  Get the cow!  I'll look after the baby!  Go on, I
tell you!  Do you think I'd let them get Ashley's baby?  Go on!"

Melly looked despairingly backward but hammered her heels into the
horse and, with a scattering of gravel, was off down the drive
toward the pasture.

Scarlett thought:  "I never expected to see Melly Hamilton
straddling a horse!" and then she ran into the house.  Wade was at
her heels, sobbing, trying to catch her flying skirts.  As she went
up the steps, three at a bound, she saw Suellen and Carreen with
split-oak baskets on their arms, running toward the pantry, and
Pork tugging none too gently at Gerald's arm, dragging him toward
the back porch.  Gerald was mumbling querulously and pulling away
like a child.

From the back yard she heard Mammy's strident voice:  "You, Priss!
You git unner dat house an' han' me dem shoats!  You knows mighty
well Ah's too big ter crawl thoo dem lattices.  Dilcey, comyere an'
mek dis wuthless chile--"

"And I thought it was such a good idea to keep the pigs under the
house, so nobody could steal them," thought Scarlett, running into
her room.  "Why, oh, why didn't I build a pen for them down in the
swamp?"

She tore open her top bureau drawer and scratched about in the
clothing until the Yankee's wallet was in her hand.  Hastily she
picked up the solitaire ring and the diamond earbobs from where she
had hidden them in her sewing basket and shoved them into the
wallet.  But where to hide it?  In the mattress?  Up the chimney?
Throw it in the well?  Put it in her bosom?  No, never there!  The
outlines of the wallet might show through her basque and if the
Yankees saw it they would strip her naked and search her.

"I shall die if they do!" she thought wildly.

Downstairs there was a pandemonium of racing feet and sobbing
voices.  Even in her frenzy, Scarlett wished she had Melanie with
her, Melly with her quiet voice, Melly who was so brave the day she
shot the Yankee.  Melly was worth three of the others.  Melly--what
had Melly said?  Oh, yes, the baby!

Clutching the wallet to her, Scarlett ran across the hall to the
room where little Beau was sleeping in the low cradle.  She
snatched him up into her arms and he awoke, waving small fists and
slobbering sleepily.

She heard Suellen crying:  "Come on, Carreen!  Come on!  We've got
enough.  Oh, Sister, hurry!"  There were wild squealings, indignant
gruntings in the back yard and, running to the widow, Scarlett saw
Mammy waddling hurriedly across the cotton field with a struggling
young pig under each arm.  Behind her was Pork also carrying two
pigs and pushing Gerald before him.  Gerald was stumping across the
furrows, waving his cane.

Leaning out of the window Scarlett yelled:  "Get the sow, Dilcey!
Make Prissy drive her out.  You can chase her across the fields!"

Dilcey looked up, her bronzed face harassed.  In her apron was a
pile of silver tableware.  She pointed under the house.

"The sow done bit Prissy and got her penned up unner the house."

"Good for the sow," thought Scarlett.  She hurried back into her
room and hastily gathered from their hiding place the bracelets,
brooch, miniature and cup she had found on the dead Yankee.  But
where to hide them?  It was awkward, carrying little Beau in one
arm and the wallet and the trinkets in the other.  She started to
lay him on the bed.

He set up a wail at leaving her arms and a welcome thought came to
her.  What better hiding place could there be than a baby's diaper?
She quickly turned him over, pulled up his dress and thrust the
wallet down the diaper next to his backside.  He yelled louder at
this treatment and she hastily tightened the triangular garment
about his threshing legs.

"Now," she thought, drawing a deep breath, "now for the swamp!"

Tucking him screaming under one arm and clutching the jewelry to
her with the other, she raced into the upstairs hall.  Suddenly her
rapid steps paused, fright weakening her knees.  How silent the
house was!  How dreadfully still!  Had they all gone off and left
her?  Hadn't anyone waited for her?  She hadn't meant for them to
leave her here alone.  These days anything could happen to a lone
woman and with the Yankees coming--

She jumped as a slight noise sounded and, turning quickly, saw
crouched by the banisters her forgotten son, his eyes enormous with
terror.  He tried to speak but his throat only worked silently.

"Get up, Wade Hampton," she commanded swiftly.  "Get up and walk.
Mother can't carry you now."

He ran to her, like a small frightened animal, and clutching her
wide skirt, buried his face in it.  She could feel his small hands
groping through the folds for her legs.  She started down the
stairs, each step hampered by Wade's dragging hands and she said
fiercely:  "Turn me loose, Wade!  Turn me loose and walk!"  But the
child only clung the closer.

As she reached the landing, the whole lower floor leaped up at her.
All the homely, well-loved articles of furniture seemed to whisper:
"Good-by!  Good-by!"  A sob rose in her throat.  There was the open
door of the office where Ellen had labored so diligently and she
could glimpse a corner of the old secretary.  There was the dining
room, with chairs pushed awry and food still on the plates.  There
on the floor were the rag rugs Ellen had dyed and woven herself.
And there was the old portrait of Grandma Robillard, with bosoms
half bared, hair piled high and nostrils cut so deeply as to give
her face a perpetual well-bred sneer.  Everything which had been
part of her earliest memories, everything bound up with the deepest
roots in her:  "Good-by!  Good-by, Scarlett O'Hara!"

The Yankees would burn it all--all!

This was her last view of home, her last view except what she might
see from the cover of the woods or the swamp, the tall chimneys
wrapped in smoke, the roof crashing in flame.

"I can't leave you," she thought and her teeth chattered with fear.
"I can't leave you.  Pa wouldn't leave you.  He told them they'd
have to burn you over his head.  Then, they'll burn you over my
head for I can't leave you either.  You're all I've got left."

With the decision, some of her fear fell away and there remained
only a congealed feeling in her breast, as if all hope and fear had
frozen.  As she stood there, she heard from the avenue the sound of
many horses' feet, the jingle of bridle bits and sabers rattling in
scabbards and a harsh voice crying a command:  "Dismount!"  Swiftly
she bent to the child beside her and her voice was urgent but oddly
gentle.

"Turn me loose, Wade, honey!  You run down the stairs quick and
through the back yard toward the swamp.  Mammy will be there and
Aunt Melly.  Run quickly, darling, and don't be afraid."

At the change in her tone, the boy looked up and Scarlett was
appalled at the look in his eyes, like a baby rabbit in a trap.

"Oh, Mother of God!" she prayed.  "Don't let him have a convulsion!
Not--not before the Yankees.  They mustn't know we are afraid."
And, as the child only gripped her skirt the tighter, she said
clearly:  "Be a little man, Wade.  They're only a passel of damn
Yankees!"

And she went down the steps to meet them.



Sherman was marching through Georgia, from Atlanta to the sea.
Behind him lay the smoking ruins of Atlanta to which the torch had
been set as the blue army tramped out.  Before him lay three
hundred miles of territory virtually undefended save by a few state
militia and the old men and young boys of the Home Guard.

Here lay the fertile state, dotted with plantations, sheltering the
women and children, the very old and the negroes.  In a swath
eighty miles wide the Yankees were looting and burning.  There were
hundreds of homes in flames, hundreds of homes resounding with
their footsteps.  But, to Scarlett, watching the bluecoats pour
into the front hall, it was not a countrywide affair.  It was
entirely personal, a malicious action aimed directly at her and
hers.

She stood at the foot of the stairs, the baby in her arms, Wade
pressed tightly against her, his head hidden in her skirts as the
Yankees swarmed through the house, pushing roughly past her up the
stairs, dragging furniture onto the front porch, running bayonets
and knives into upholstery and digging inside for concealed
valuables.  Upstairs they were ripping open mattresses and feather
beds until the air in the hall was thick with feathers that floated
softly down on her head.  Impotent rage quelled what little fear
was left in her heart as she stood helpless while they plundered
and stole and ruined.

The sergeant in charge was a bow-legged, grizzled little man with a
large wad of tobacco in his cheek.  He reached Scarlett before any
of his men and, spitting freely on the floor and her skirts, said
briefly:

"Lemme have what you got in yore hand, lady."

She had forgotten the trinkets she had intended to hide and, with a
sneer which she hoped was as eloquent as that pictured on Grandma
Robillard's face, she flung the articles to the floor and almost
enjoyed the rapacious scramble that ensued.

"I'll trouble you for thet ring and them earbobs."

Scarlett tucked the baby more securely under her arm so that he
hung face downward, crimson and screaming, and removed the garnet
earrings which had been Gerald's wedding present to Ellen.  Then
she stripped off the large sapphire solitaire which Charles had
given her as an engagement ring.

"Don't throw um.  Hand um to me," said the sergeant, putting out
his hands.  "Them bastards got enough already.  What else have you
got?"  His eyes went over her basque sharply.

For a moment Scarlett went faint, already feeling rough hands
thrusting themselves into her bosom, fumbling at her garters.

"That is all, but I suppose it is customary to strip your victims?"

"Oh, I'll take your word," said the sergeant good-naturedly,
spitting again as he turned away.  Scarlett righted the baby and
tried to soothe him, holding her hand over the place on the diaper
where the wallet was hidden, thanking God that Melanie had a baby
and that baby had a diaper.

Upstairs she could hear heavy boots trampling, the protesting
screech of furniture pulled across the floor, the crashing of china
and mirrors, the curses when nothing of value appeared.  From the
yard came loud cries:  "Head um off!  Don't let um get away!" and
the despairing squawks of the hens and quacking and honking of the
ducks and geese.  A pang went through her as she heard an agonized
squealing which was suddenly stilled by a pistol shot and she knew
that the sow was dead.  Damn Prissy!  She had run off and left her.
If only the shoats were safe!  If only the family had gotten safely
to the swamp!  But there was no way of knowing.

She stood quietly in the hall while the soldiers boiled about her,
shouting and cursing.  Wade's fingers were in her skirt in a
terrified grip.  She could feel his body shaking as he pressed
against her but she could not bring herself to speak reassuringly
to him.  She could not bring herself to utter any word to the
Yankees, either of pleading, protest or anger.  She could only
thank God that her knees still had the strength to support her,
that her neck was still strong enough to hold her head high.  But
when a squad of bearded men came lumbering down the steps, laden
with an assortment of stolen articles and she saw Charles' sword in
the hands of one, she did cry out.

That sword was Wade's.  It had been his father's and his
grandfather's sword and Scarlett had given it to the little boy on
his last birthday.  They had made quite a ceremony of it and
Melanie had cried, cried with tears of pride and sorrowful memory,
and kissed him and said he must grow up to be a brave soldier like
his father and his grandfather.  Wade was very proud of it and
often climbed upon the table beneath where it hung to pat it.
Scarlett could endure seeing her own possessions going out of the
house in hateful alien hands but not this--not her little boy's
pride.  Wade, peering from the protection of her skirts at the
sound of her cry, found speech and courage in a mighty sob.
Stretching out one hand he cried:

"Mine!"

"You can't take that!" said Scarlett swiftly, holding out her hand
too.

"I can't, hey?" said the little soldier who held it, grinning
impudently at her.  "Well, I can!  It's a Rebel sword!"

"It's--it's not.  It's a Mexican War sword.  You can't take it.
It's my little boy's.  It was his grandfather's!  Oh, Captain," she
cried, turning to the sergeant, "please make him give it to me!"

The sergeant, pleased at his promotion, stepped forward.

"Lemme see thet sword, Bub," he said.

Reluctantly, the little trooper handed it to him.  "It's got a
solid-gold hilt," he said.

The sergeant turned it in his hand, held the hilt up to the
sunlight to read the engraved inscription.

"'To Colonel William R. Hamilton,'" he deciphered.  "'From His
Staff.  For Gallantry.  Buena Vista.  1847.'"

"Ho, lady," he said, "I was at Buena Vista myself."

"Indeed," said Scarlett icily.

"Was I?  Thet was hot fightin', lemme tell you.  I ain't seen such
hot fightin' in this war as we seen in thet one.  So this sword was
this little tyke's grandaddy's?"

"Yes."

"Well, he can have it," said the sergeant, who was satisfied enough
with the jewelry and trinkets tied up in his handkerchief.

"But it's got a solid-gold hilt," insisted the little trooper.

"We'll leave her thet to remember us by," grinned the sergeant.

Scarlett took the sword, not even saying "Thank you."  Why should
she thank these thieves for returning her own property to her?  She
held the sword against her while the little cavalryman argued and
wrangled with the sergeant.

"By God, I'll give these damn Rebels something to remember me by,"
shouted the private finally when the sergeant, losing his good
nature, told him to go to hell and not talk back.  The little man
went charging toward the back of the house and Scarlett breathed
more easily.  They had said nothing about burning the house.  They
hadn't told her to leave so they could fire it.  Perhaps--perhaps--
The men came rambling into the hall from the upstairs and the out
of doors.

"Anything?" questioned the sergeant.

"One hog and a few chickens and ducks."

"Some corn and a few yams and beans.  That wildcat we saw on the
horse must have given the alarm, all right."

"Regular Paul Revere, eh?"

"Well, there ain't much here, Sarge.  You got the pickin's.  Let's
move on before the whole country gets the news we're comin'."

"Didja dig under the smokehouse?  They generally buries things
there."

"Ain't no smokehouse."

"Didja dig in the nigger cabins?"

"Nothin' but cotton in the cabins.  We set fire to it."

For a brief instant Scarlett saw the long hot days in the cotton
field, felt again the terrible ache in her back, the raw bruised
flesh of her shoulders.  All for nothing.  The cotton was gone.

"You ain't got much, for a fac', have you, lady?"

"Your army has been here before," she said coolly.

"That's a fac'.  We were in this neighborhood in September," said
one of the men, turning something in his hand.  "I'd forgot."

Scarlett saw it was Ellen's gold thimble that he held.  How often
she had seen it gleaming in and out of Ellen's fancy work.  The
sight of it brought back too many hurting memories of the slender
hand which had worn it.  There it lay in this stranger's calloused
dirty palm and soon it would find its way North and onto the finger
of some Yankee woman who would be proud to wear stolen things.
Ellen's thimble!

Scarlett dropped her head so the enemy could not see her cry and
the tears fell slowly down on the baby's head.  Through the blur,
she saw the men moving toward the doorway, heard the sergeant
calling commands in a loud rough voice.  They were going and Tara
was safe, but with the pain of Ellen's memory on her, she was
hardly glad.  The sound of the banging sabers and horses' hooves
brought little relief and she stood, suddenly weak and nerveless,
as they moved off down the avenue, every man laden with stolen
goods, clothing, blankets, pictures, hens and ducks, the sow.

Then to her nostrils was borne the smell of smoke and she turned,
too weak with lessening strain, to care about the cotton.  Through
the open windows of the dining room, she saw smoke drifting lazily
out of the negro cabins.  There went the cotton.  There went the
tax money and part of the money which was to see them through this
bitter winter.  There was nothing she could do about it either,
except watch.  She had seen fires in cotton before and she knew how
difficult they were to put out, even with many men laboring at it.
Thank God, the quarters were so far from the house!  Thank God,
there was no wind today to carry sparks to the roof of Tara!

Suddenly she swung about, rigid as a pointer, and stared with
horror-struck eyes down the hall, down the covered passageway
toward the kitchen.  There was smoke coming from the kitchen!

Somewhere between the hall and the kitchen, she laid the baby down.
Somewhere she flung off Wade's grip, slinging him against the wall.
She burst into the smoke-filled kitchen and reeled back, coughing,
her eyes streaming tears from the smoke.  Again she plunged in, her
skirt held over her nose.

The room was dark, lit as it was by one small window, and so thick
with smoke that she was blinded, but she could hear the hiss and
crackle of flames.  Dashing a hand across her eyes, she peered
squinting and saw thin lines of flame creeping across the kitchen
floor, toward the walls.  Someone had scattered the blazing logs in
the open fireplace across the whole room and the tinder-dry pine
floor was sucking in the flames and spewing them up like water.

Back she rushed to the dining room and snatched a rag rug from the
floor, spilling two chairs with a crash.

"I'll never beat it out--never, never!  Oh, God, if only there was
someone to help!  Tara is gone--gone!  Oh, God!  This was what that
little wretch meant when he said he'd give me something to remember
him by!  Oh, if I'd only let him have the sword!"

In the hallway she passed her son lying in the corner with his
sword.  His eyes were closed and his face had a look of slack,
unearthly peace.

"My God!  He's dead!  They've frightened him to death!" she thought
in agony but she raced by him to the bucket of drinking water which
always stood in the passageway by the kitchen door.

She soused the end of the rug into the bucket and drawing a deep
breath plunged again into the smoke-filled room slamming the door
behind her.  For an eternity she reeled and coughed, beating the
rug against the lines of fire that shot swiftly beyond her.  Twice
her long skirt took fire and she slapped it out with her hands.
She could smell the sickening smell of her hair scorching, as it
came loose from its pins and swept about her shoulders.  The flames
raced ever beyond her, toward the walls of the covered runway,
fiery snakes that writhed and leaped and, exhaustion sweeping her,
she knew that it was hopeless.

Then the door swung open and the sucking draft flung the flames
higher.  It closed with a bang and, in the swirling smoke,
Scarlett, half blind, saw Melanie, stamping her feet on the flames,
beating at them with something dark and heavy.  She saw her
staggering, heard her coughing, caught a lightning-flash glimpse of
her set white face and eyes narrow to slits against the smoke, saw
her small body curving back and forth as she swung her rug up and
down.  For another eternity they fought and swayed, side by side,
and Scarlett could see that the lines of fire were shortening.
Then suddenly Melanie turned toward her and, with a cry, hit her
across the shoulders with all her might.  Scarlett went down in a
whirlwind of smoke and darkness.

When she opened her eyes she was lying on the back porch, her head
pillowed comfortably on Melanie's lap, and the afternoon sunlight
was shining on her face.  Her hands, face and shoulders smarted
intolerably from burns.  Smoke was still rolling from the quarters,
enveloping the cabins in thick clouds, and the smell of burning
cotton was strong.  Scarlett saw wisps of smoke drifting from the
kitchen and she stirred frantically to rise.

But she was pushed back as Melanie's calm voice said:  "Lie still,
dear.  The fire's out."

She lay quiet for a moment, eyes closed, sighing with relief, and
heard the slobbery gurgle of the baby near by and the reassuring
sound of Wade's hiccoughing.  So he wasn't dead, thank God!  She
opened her eyes and looked up into Melanie's face.  Her curls were
singed, her face black with smut but her eyes were sparkling with
excitement and she was smiling.

"You look like a nigger," murmured Scarlett, burrowing her head
wearily into its soft pillow.

"And you look like the end man in a minstrel show," replied Melanie
equably.

"Why did you have to hit me?"

"Because, my darling, your back was on fire.  I didn't dream you'd
faint, though the Lord knows you've had enough today to kill
you. . . .  I came back as soon as I got the stock safe in the
woods.  I nearly died, thinking about you and the baby alone.
Did--the Yankees harm you?"

"If you mean did they rape me, no," said Scarlett, groaning as she
tried to sit up.  Though Melanie's lap was soft, the porch on which
she was lying was far from comfortable.  "But they've stolen
everything, everything.  We've lost everything--  Well, what is
there to look so happy about?"

"We haven't lost each other and our babies are all right and we
have a roof over our heads," said Melanie and there was a lilt in
her voice.  "And that's all anyone can hope for now. . . .
Goodness but Beau is wet!  I suppose the Yankees even stole his
extra diapers.  He--  Scarlett, what on earth is in his diaper?"

She thrust a suddenly frightened hand down the baby's back and
brought up the wallet.  For a moment she looked at it as if she had
never seen it before and then she began to laugh, peal on peal of
mirth that had in it no hint of hysteria.

"Nobody but you would ever have thought of it," she cried and
flinging her arms around Scarlett's neck she kissed her.  "You are
the beatenest sister I ever had!"

Scarlett permitted the embrace because she was too tired to
struggle, because the words of praise brought balm to her spirit
and because, in the dark smoke-filled kitchen, there had been born
a greater respect for her sister-in-law, a closer feeling of
comradeship.

"I'll say this for her," she thought grudgingly, "she's always
there when you need her."



CHAPTER XXVIII


Cold weather set in abruptly with a killing frost.  Chilling winds
swept beneath the doorsills and rattled the loose windowpanes with
a monotonous tinkling sound.  The last of the leaves fell from the
bare trees and only the pines stood clothed, black and cold against
pale skies.  The rutted red roads were frozen to flintiness and
hunger rode the winds through Georgia.

Scarlett recalled bitterly her conversation with Grandma Fontaine.
On that afternoon two months ago, which now seemed years in the
past, she had told the old lady she had already known the worst
which could possibly happen to her, and she had spoken from the
bottom of her heart.  Now that remark sounded like schoolgirl
hyperbole.  Before Sherman's men came through Tara the second time,
she had her small riches of food and money, she had neighbors more
fortunate than she and she had the cotton which would tide her over
until spring.  Now the cotton was gone, the food was gone, the
money was of no use to her, for there was no food to buy with it,
and the neighbors were in worse plight than she.  At least, she had
the cow and the calf, a few shoats and the horse, and the neighbors
had nothing but the little they had been able to hide in the woods
and bury in the ground.

Fairhill, the Tarleton home, was burned to the foundations, and
Mrs. Tarleton and the four girls were existing in the overseer's
house.  The Munroe house near Lovejoy was leveled too.  The wooden
wing of Mimosa had burned and only the thick resistant stucco of
the main house and the frenzied work of the Fontaine women and
their slaves with wet blankets and quilts had saved it.  The
Calverts' house had again been spared, due to the intercession of
Hilton, the Yankee overseer, but there was not a head of livestock,
not a fowl, not an ear of corn left on the place.

At Tara and throughout the County, the problem was food.  Most of
the families had nothing at all but the remains of their yam crops
and their peanuts and such game as they could catch in the woods.
What they had, each shared with less fortunate friends, as they had
done in more prosperous days.  But the time soon came when there
was nothing to share.

At Tara, they ate rabbit and possum and catfish, if Pork was lucky.
On other days a small amount of milk, hickory nuts, roasted acorns
and yams.  They were always hungry.  To Scarlett it seemed that at
every turn she met outstretched hands, pleading eyes.  The sight of
them drove her almost to madness, for she was as hungry as they.

She ordered the calf killed, because he drank so much of the
precious milk, and that night everyone ate so much fresh veal all
of them were ill.  She knew that she should kill one of the shoats
but she put it off from day to day, hoping to raise them to
maturity.  They were so small.  There would be so little of them to
eat if they were killed now and so much more if they could be saved
a little longer.  Nightly she debated with Melanie the advisability
of sending Pork abroad on the horse with some greenbacks to try to
buy food.  But the fear that the horse might be captured and the
money taken from Pork deterred them.  They did not know where the
Yankees were.  They might be a thousand miles away or only across
the river.  Once, Scarlett, in desperation, started to ride out
herself to search for food, but the hysterical outbursts of the
whole family fearful of the Yankees made her abandon the plan.

Pork foraged far, at times not coming home all night, and Scarlett
did not ask him where he went.  Sometimes he returned with game,
sometimes with a few ears of corn, a bag of dried peas.  Once he
brought home a rooster which he said he found in the woods.  The
family ate it with relish but a sense of guilt, knowing very well
Pork had stolen it, as he had stolen the peas and corn.  One night
soon after this, he tapped on Scarlett's door long after the house
was asleep and sheepishly exhibited a leg peppered with small shot.
As she bandaged it for him, he explained awkwardly that when
attempting to get into a hen coop at Fayetteville, he had been
discovered.  Scarlett did not ask whose hen coop but patted Pork's
shoulder gently, tears in her eyes.  Negroes were provoking
sometimes and stupid and lazy, but there was loyalty in them that
money couldn't buy, a feeling of oneness with their white folks
which made them risk their lives to keep food on the table.

In other days Pork's pilferings would have been a serious matter,
probably calling for a whipping.  In other days she would have been
forced at least to reprimand him severely.  "Always remember,
dear," Ellen had said, "you are responsible for the moral as well
as the physical welfare of the darkies God has intrusted to your
care.  You must realize that they are like children and must be
guarded from themselves like children, and you must always set them
a good example."

But now, Scarlett pushed that admonition into the back of her mind.
That she was encouraging theft, and perhaps theft from people worse
off than she, was no longer a matter for conscience.  In fact the
morals of the affair weighed lightly upon her.  Instead of
punishment or reproof, she only regretted he had been shot.

"You must be more careful, Pork.  We don't want to lose you.  What
would we do without you?  You've been mighty good and faithful and
when we get some money again, I'm going to buy you a big gold watch
and engrave on it something out of the Bible.  'Well done, good and
faithful servant.'"

Pork beamed under the praise and gingerly rubbed his bandaged leg.

"Dat soun' mighty fine, Miss Scarlett.  W'en you speckin' ter git
dat money?"

"I don't know, Pork, but I'm going to get it some time, somehow."
She bent on him an unseeing glance that was so passionately bitter
he stirred uneasily, "Some day, when this war is over, I'm going to
have lots of money, and when I do I'll never be hungry or cold
again.  None of us will ever be hungry or cold.  We'll all wear
fine clothes and have fried chicken every day and--"

Then she stopped.  The strictest rule at Tara, one which she
herself had made and which she rigidly enforced, was that no one
should ever talk of the fine meals they had eaten in the past or
what they would eat now, if they had the opportunity.

Pork slipped from the room as she remained staring moodily into the
distance.  In the old days, now dead and gone, life had been so
complex, so full of intricate and complicated problems.  There had
been the problem of trying to win Ashley's love and trying to keep
a dozen other beaux dangling and unhappy.  There had been small
breaches of conduct to be concealed from her elders, jealous girls
to be flouted or placated, styles of dresses and materials to be
chosen, different coiffures to be tried and, oh, so many, many
other matters to be decided!  Now life was so amazingly simple.
Now all that mattered was food enough to keep off starvation,
clothing enough to prevent freezing and a roof overhead which did
not leak too much.

It was during these days that Scarlett dreamed and dreamed again
the nightmare which was to haunt her for years.  It was always the
same dream, the details never varied, but the terror of it mounted
each time it came to her and the fear of experiencing it again
troubled even her waking hours.  She remembered so well the
incidents of the day when she had first dreamed it.

Cold rain had fallen for days and the house was chill with drafts
and dampness.  The logs in the fireplace were wet and smoky and
gave little heat.  There had been nothing to eat except milk since
breakfast, for the yams were exhausted and Pork's snares and
fishlines had yielded nothing.  One of the shoats would have to be
killed the next day if they were to eat at all.  Strained and
hungry faces, black and white, were staring at her, mutely asking
her to provide food.  She would have to risk losing the horse and
send Pork out to buy something.  And to make matters worse, Wade
was ill with a sore throat and a raging fever and there was neither
doctor nor medicine for him.

Hungry, weary with watching her child, Scarlett left him to
Melanie's care for a while and lay down on her bed to nap.  Her
feet icy, she twisted and turned, unable to sleep, weighed down
with fear and despair.  Again and again, she thought:  "What shall
I do?  Where shall I turn?  Isn't there anybody in the world who
can help me?"  Where had all the security of the world gone?  Why
wasn't there someone, some strong wise person to take the burdens
from her?  She wasn't made to carry them.  She did not know how to
carry them.  And then she fell into an uneasy doze.

She was in a wild strange country so thick with swirling mist she
could not see her hand before her face.  The earth beneath her feet
was uneasy.  It was a haunted land, still with a terrible
stillness, and she was lost in it, lost and terrified as a child in
the night.  She was bitterly cold and hungry and so fearful of what
lurked in the mists about her that she tried to scream and could
not.  There were things in the fog reaching out fingers to pluck at
her skirt, to drag her down into the uneasy quaking earth on which
she stood, silent, relentless, spectral hands.  Then, she knew that
somewhere in the opaque gloom about her there was shelter, help, a
haven of refuge and warmth.  But where was it?  Could she reach it
before the hands clutched her and dragged her down into the
quicksands?

Suddenly she was running, running through the mist like a mad
thing, crying and screaming, throwing out her arms to clutch only
empty air and wet mist.  Where was the haven?  It eluded her but it
was there, hidden, somewhere.  If she could only reach it!  If she
could only reach it she would be safe!  But terror was weakening
her legs, hunger making her faint.  She gave one despairing cry and
awoke to find Melanie's worried face above her and Melanie's hand
shaking her to wakefulness.

The dream returned again and again, whenever she went to sleep with
an empty stomach.  And that was frequently enough.  It so
frightened her that she feared to sleep, although she feverishly
told herself there was nothing in such a dream to be afraid of.
There was nothing in a dream about fog to scare her so.  Nothing at
all--yet the thought of dropping off into that mist-filled country
so terrified her she began sleeping with Melanie, who would wake
her up when her moaning and twitching revealed that she was again
in the clutch of the dream.

Under the strain she grew white and thin.  The pretty roundness
left her face, throwing her cheek bones into prominence,
emphasizing her slanting green eyes and giving her the look of a
prowling, hungry cat.

"Daytime is enough like a nightmare without my dreaming things,"
she thought desperately and began hoarding her daily ration to eat
it just before she went to sleep.



At Christmas time Frank Kennedy and a small troop from the
commissary department jogged up to Tara on a futile hunt for grain
and animals for the army.  They were a ragged and ruffianly
appearing crew, mounted on lame and heaving horses which obviously
were in too bad condition to be used for more active service.  Like
their animals the men had been invalided out of the front-line
forces and, except for Frank, all of them had an arm missing or an
eye gone or stiffened joints.  Most of them wore blue overcoats of
captured Yankees and, for a brief instant of horror, those at Tara
thought Sherman's men had returned.

They stayed the night on the plantation, sleeping on the floor in
the parlor, luxuriating as they stretched themselves on the velvet
rug, for it had been weeks since they had slept under a roof or on
anything softer than pine needles and hard earth.  For all their
dirty beards and tatters they were a well-bred crowd, full of
pleasant small talk, jokes and compliments and very glad to be
spending Christmas Eve in a big house, surrounded by pretty women
as they had been accustomed to do in days long past.  They refused
to be serious about the war, told outrageous lies to make the girls
laugh and brought to the bare and looted house the first lightness,
the first hint of festivity it had known in many a day.

"It's almost like the old days when we had house parties, isn't
it?" whispered Suellen happily to Scarlett.  Suellen was raised to
the skies by having a beau of her own in the house again and she
could hardly take her eyes off Frank Kennedy.  Scarlett was
surprised to see that Suellen could be almost pretty, despite the
thinness which had persisted since her illness.  Her cheeks were
flushed and there was a soft luminous look in her eyes.

"She really must care about him," thought Scarlett in contempt.
"And I guess she'd be almost human if she ever had a husband of her
own, even if her husband was old fuss-budget Frank."

Carreen had brightened a little too, and some of the sleep-walking
look left her eyes that night.  She had found that one of the men
had known Brent Tarleton and had been with him the day he was
killed, and she promised herself a long private talk with him after
supper.

At supper Melanie surprised them all by forcing herself out of her
timidity and being almost vivacious.  She laughed and joked and
almost but not quite coquetted with a one-eyed soldier who gladly
repaid her efforts with extravagant gallantries.  Scarlett knew the
effort this involved both mentally and physically, for Melanie
suffered torments of shyness in the presence of anything male.
Moreover she was far from well.  She insisted she was strong and
did more work even than Dilcey but Scarlett knew she was sick.
When she lifted things her face went white and she had a way of
sitting down suddenly after exertions, as if her legs would no
longer support her.  But tonight she, like Suellen and Carreen,
was doing everything possible to make the soldiers enjoy their
Christmas Eve.  Scarlett alone took no pleasure in the guests.

The troop had added their ration of parched corn and side meat to
the supper of dried peas, stewed dried apples and peanuts which
Mammy set before them and they declared it was the best meal they
had had in months.  Scarlett watched them eat and she was uneasy.
She not only begrudged them every mouthful they ate but she was on
tenterhooks lest they discover somehow that Pork had slaughtered
one of the shoats the day before.  It now hung in the pantry and
she had grimly promised her household that she would scratch out
the eyes of anyone who mentioned the shoat to their guests or the
presence of the dead pig's sisters and brothers, safe in their pen
in the swamp.  These hungry men could devour the whole shoat at one
meal and, if they knew of the live hogs, they could commandeer them
for the army.  She was alarmed, too, for the cow and the horse and
wished they were hidden in the swamp, instead of tied in the woods
at the bottom of the pasture.  If the commissary took her stock,
Tara could not possibly live through the winter.  There would be no
way of replacing them.  As to what the army would eat, she did not
care.  Let the army feed the army--if it could.  It was hard enough
for her to feed her own.

The men added as dessert some "ramrod rolls" from their knapsacks,
and this was the first time Scarlett had ever seen this Confederate
article of diet about which there were almost as many jokes as
about lice.  They were charred spirals of what appeared to be wood.
The men dared her to take a bite and, when she did, she discovered
that beneath the smoke-blackened surface was unsalted corn bread.
The soldiers mixed their ration of corn meal with water, and salt
too when they could get it, wrapped the thick paste about their
ramrods and roasted the mess over camp fires.  It was as hard as
rock candy and as tasteless as sawdust and after one bite Scarlett
hastily handed it back amid roars of laughter.  She met Melanie's
eyes and the same thought was plain in both faces. . . .  "How can
they go on fighting if they have only this stuff to eat?"

The meal was gay enough and even Gerald, presiding absently at the
head of the table, managed to evoke from the back of his dim mind
some of the manner of a host and an uncertain smile.  The men
talked, the women smiled and flattered--but Scarlett turning
suddenly to Frank Kennedy to ask him news of Miss Pittypat, caught
an expression on his face which made her forget what she intended
to say.

His eyes had left Suellen's and were wandering about the room, to
Gerald's childlike puzzled eyes, to the floor, bare of rugs, to the
mantelpiece denuded of its ornaments, the sagging springs and torn
upholstery into which Yankee bayonets had ripped, the cracked
mirror above the sideboard, the unfaded squares on the wall where
pictures had hung before the looters came, the scant table service,
the decently mended but old dresses of the girls, the flour sack
which had been made into a kilt for Wade.

Frank was remembering the Tara he had known before the war and on
his face was a hurt look, a look of tired impotent anger.  He loved
Suellen, liked her sisters, respected Gerald and had a genuine
fondness for the plantation.  Since Sherman had swept through
Georgia, Frank had seen many appalling sights as he rode about the
state trying to collect supplies, but nothing had gone to his heart
as Tara did now.  He wanted to do something for the O'Haras,
especially Suellen, and there was nothing he could do.  He was
unconsciously wagging his whiskered head in pity and clicking his
tongue against his teeth when Scarlett caught his eye.  He saw the
flame of indignant pride in them and he dropped his gaze quickly to
his plate in embarrassment.

The girls were hungry for news.  There had been no mail service
since Atlanta fell, now four months past, and they were in complete
ignorance as to where the Yankees were, how the Confederate Army
was faring, what had happened to Atlanta and to old friends.
Frank, whose work took him all over the section, was as good as a
newspaper, better even, for he was kin to or knew almost everyone
from Macon north to Atlanta, and he could supply bits of
interesting personal gossip which the papers always omitted.  To
cover his embarrassment at being caught by Scarlett, he plunged
hastily into a recital of news.  The Confederates, he told them,
had retaken Atlanta after Sherman marched out, but it was a
valueless prize as Sherman had burned it completely.

"But I thought Atlanta burned the night I left," cried Scarlett,
bewildered.  "I thought our boys burned it!"

"Oh, no, Miss Scarlett!" cried Frank, shocked.  "We'd never burn
one of our own towns with our own folks in it!  What you saw
burning was the warehouses and the supplies we didn't want the
Yankees to capture and the foundries and the ammunition.  But that
was all.  When Sherman took the town the houses and stores were
standing there as pretty as you please.  And he quartered his men
in them."

"But what happened to the people?  Did he--did he kill them?"

"He killed some--but not with bullets," said the one-eyed soldier
grimly.  "Soon's he marched into Atlanta he told the mayor that all
the people in town would have to move out, every living soul.  And
there were plenty of old folks that couldn't stand the trip and
sick folks that ought not to have been moved and ladies who were--
well, ladies who hadn't ought to be moved either.  And he moved
them out in the biggest rainstorm you ever saw, hundreds and
hundreds of them, and dumped them in the woods near Rough and Ready
and sent word to General Hood to come and get them.  And a plenty
of the folks died of pneumonia and not being able to stand that
sort of treatment."

"Oh, but why did he do that?  They couldn't have done him any
harm," cried Melanie.

"He said he wanted the town to rest his men and horses in," said
Frank.  "And he rested them there till the middle of November and
then he lit out.  And he set fire to the whole town when he left
and burned everything."

"Oh, surely not everything!" cried the girls in dismay.

It was inconceivable that the bustling town they knew, so full of
people, so crowded with soldiers, was gone.  All the lovely homes
beneath shady trees, all the big stores and the fine hotels--surely
they couldn't be gone!  Melanie seemed ready to burst into tears,
for she had been born there and knew no other home.  Scarlett's
heart sank because she had come to love the place second only to
Tara.

"Well, almost everything," Frank amended hastily, disturbed by the
expressions on their faces.  He tried to look cheerful, for he did
not believe in upsetting ladies.  Upset ladies always upset him and
made him feel helpless.  He could not bring himself to tell them
the worst.  Let them find out from some one else.

He could not tell them what the army saw when it marched back into
Atlanta, the acres and acres of chimneys standing blackly above
ashes, piles of half-burned rubbish and tumbled heaps of brick
clogging the streets, old trees dying from fire, their charred
limbs tumbling to the ground in the cold wind.  He remembered how
the sight had turned him sick, remembered the bitter curses of the
Confederates when they saw the remains of the town.  He hoped the
ladies would never hear of the horrors of the looted cemetery, for
they'd never get over that.  Charlie Hamilton and Melanie's mother
and father were buried there.  The sight of that cemetery still
gave Frank nightmares.  Hoping to find jewelry buried with the
dead, the Yankee soldiers had broken open vaults, dug up graves.
They had robbed the bodies, stripped from the coffins gold and
silver name plates, silver trimmings and silver handles.  The
skeletons and corpses, flung helterskelter among their splintered
caskets, lay exposed and so pitiful.

And Frank couldn't tell them about the dogs and the cats.  Ladies
set such a store by pets.  But the thousands of starving animals,
left homeless when their masters had been so rudely evacuated, had
shocked him almost as much as the cemetery, for Frank loved cats
and dogs.  The animals had been frightened, cold, ravenous, wild as
forest creatures, the strong attacking the weak, the weak waiting
for the weaker to die so they could eat them.  And, above the
ruined town, the buzzards splotched the wintry sky with graceful,
sinister bodies.

Frank cast about in his mind for some mitigating information that
would make the ladies feel better.

"There's some houses still standing," he said, "houses that set on
big lots away from other houses and didn't catch fire.  And the
churches and the Masonic hall are left.  And a few stores too.  But
the business section and all along the railroad tracks and at Five
Points--well, ladies, that part of town is flat on the ground."

"Then," cried Scarlett bitterly, "that warehouse Charlie left me,
down on the tracks, it's gone too?"

"If it was near the tracks, it's gone, but--"  Suddenly he smiled.
Why hadn't he thought of it before?  "Cheer up, ladies!  Your Aunt
Pitty's house is still standing.  It's kind of damaged but there it
is."

"Oh, how did it escape?"

"Well, it's made of brick and it's got about the only slate roof in
Atlanta and that kept the sparks from setting it afire, I guess.
And then it's about the last house on the north end of town and the
fire wasn't so bad over that way.  Of course, the Yankees quartered
there tore it up aplenty.  They even burned the baseboard and the
mahogany stair rail for firewood, but shucks!  It's in good shape.
When I saw Miss Pitty last week in Macon--"

"You saw her?  How is she?"

"Just fine.  Just fine.  When I told her her house was still
standing, she made up her mind to come home right away.  That is--
if that old darky, Peter, will let her come.  Lots of the Atlanta
people have already come back, because they got nervous about
Macon.  Sherman didn't take Macon but everybody is afraid Wilson's
raiders will get there soon and he's worse than Sherman."

"But how silly of them to come back if there aren't any houses!
Where do they live?"

"Miss Scarlett, they're living in tents and shacks and log cabins
and doubling up six and seven families in the few houses still
standing.  And they're trying to rebuild.  Now, Miss Scarlett,
don't say they are silly.  You know Atlanta folks as well as I do.
They are plumb set on that town, most as bad as Charlestonians are
about Charleston, and it'll take more than Yankees and a burning to
keep them away.  Atlanta folks are--begging your pardon, Miss
Melly--as stubborn as mules about Atlanta.  I don't know why, for I
always thought that town a mighty pushy, impudent sort of place.
But then, I'm a countryman born and I don't like any town.  And let
me tell you, the ones who are getting back first are the smart
ones.  The ones who come back last won't find a stick or stone or
brick of their houses, because everybody's out salvaging things all
over town to rebuild their houses.  Just day before yesterday, I
saw Mrs. Merriwether and Miss Maybelle and their old darky woman
out collecting brick in a wheelbarrow.  And Mrs. Meade told me she
was thinking about building a log cabin when the doctor comes back
to help her.  She said she lived in a log cabin when she first came
to Atlanta, when it was Marthasville, and it wouldn't bother her
none to do it again.  'Course, she was only joking but that shows
you how they feel about it."

"I think they've got a lot of spirit," said Melanie proudly.
"Don't you, Scarlett?"

Scarlett nodded, a grim pleasure and pride in her adopted town
filling her.  As Frank said, it was a pushy, impudent place and
that was why she liked it.  It wasn't hide-bound and stick-in-the-
muddish like the older towns and it had a brash exuberance that
matched her own.  "I'm like Atlanta," she thought.  "It takes more
than Yankees or a burning to keep me down."

"If Aunt Pitty is going back to Atlanta, we'd better go back and
stay with her, Scarlett," said Melanie, interrupting her train of
thought.  "She'll die of fright alone."

"Now, how can I leave here, Melly?" Scarlett asked crossly.  "If
you are so anxious to go, go.  I won't stop you."

"Oh, I didn't mean it that way, darling," cried Melanie, flushing
with distress.  "How thoughtless of me!  Of course, you can't leave
Tara and--and I guess Uncle Peter and Cookie can take care of
Auntie."

"There's nothing to keep you from going," Scarlett pointed out,
shortly.

"You know I wouldn't leave you," answered Melanie.  "And I--I would
be just frightened to death without you."

"Suit yourself.  Besides, you wouldn't catch me going back to
Atlanta.  Just as soon as they get a few houses up, Sherman will
come back and burn it again."

"He won't be back," said Frank and, despite his efforts, his face
drooped.  "He's gone on through the state to the coast.  Savannah
was captured this week and they say the Yankees are going on up
into South Carolina."

"Savannah taken!"

"Yes.  Why, ladies, Savannah couldn't help but fall.  They didn't
have enough men to hold it, though they used every man they could
get--every man who could drag one foot after another.  Do you know
that when the Yankees were marching on Milledgeville, they called
out all the cadets from the military academies, no matter how young
they were, and even opened the state penitentiary to get fresh
troops?  Yes, sir, they turned loose every convict who was willing
to fight and promised him a pardon if he lived through the war.  It
kind of gave me the creeps to see those little cadets in the ranks
with thieves and cutthroats."

"They turned loose the convicts on us!"

"Now, Miss Scarlett, don't you get upset.  They're a long way off
from here, and furthermore they're making good soldiers.  I guess
being a thief don't keep a man from being a good soldier, does it?"

"I think it's wonderful," said Melanie softly.

"Well, I don't," said Scarlett flatly.  "There's thieves enough
running around the country anyway, what with the Yankees and--"
She caught herself in time but the men laughed.

"What with Yankees and our commissary department," they finished
and she flushed.

"But where's General Hood's army?" interposed Melanie hastily.
"Surely he could have held Savannah."

"Why, Miss Melanie," Frank was startled and reproachful, "General
Hood hasn't been down in that section at all.  He's been fighting
up in Tennessee, trying to draw the Yankees out of Georgia."

"And didn't his little scheme work well!" cried Scarlett
sarcastically.  "He left the damn Yankees to go through us with
nothing but schoolboys and convicts and Home Guards to protect us."

"Daughter," said Gerald rousing himself, "you are profane.  Your
mother will be grieved."

"They are damn Yankees!" cried Scarlett passionately.  "And I never
expect to call them anything else."

At the mention of Ellen everyone felt queer and conversation
suddenly ceased.  Melanie again interposed.

"When you were in Macon did you see India and Honey Wilkes?  Did
they--had they heard anything of Ashley?"

"Now, Miss Melly, you know if I'd had news of Ashley, I'd have
ridden up here from Macon right away to tell you," said Frank
reproachfully.  "No, they didn't have any news but--now, don't you
fret about Ashley, Miss Melly.  I know it's been a long time since
you heard from him, but you can't expect to hear from a fellow when
he's in prison, can you?  And things aren't as bad in Yankee
prisons as they are in ours.  After all, the Yankees have plenty to
eat and enough medicines and blankets.  They aren't like we are--
not having enough to feed ourselves, much less our prisoners."

"Oh, the Yankees have got plenty," cried Melanie, passionately
bitter.  "But they don't give things to the prisoners.  You know
they don't, Mr. Kennedy.  You are just saying that to make me feel
better.  You know that our boys freeze to death up there and starve
too and die without doctors and medicine, simply because the
Yankees hate us so much!  Oh, if we could just wipe every Yankee
off the face of the earth!  Oh, I know that Ashley is--"

"Don't say it!" cried Scarlett, her heart in her throat.  As long
as no one said Ashley was dead, there persisted in her heart a
faint hope that he lived, but she felt that if she heard the words
pronounced, in that moment he would die.

"Now, Mrs. Wilkes, don't you bother about your husband," said the
one-eyed man soothingly.  "I was captured after first Manassas and
exchanged later and when I was in prison, they fed me off the fat
of the land, fried chicken and hot biscuits--"

"I think you are a liar," said Melanie with a faint smile and the
first sign of spirit Scarlett had ever seen her display with a man.
"What do you think?"

"I think so too," said the one-eyed man and slapped his leg with a
laugh.

"If you'll all come into the parlor, I'll sing you some Christmas
carols," said Melanie, glad to change the subject.  "The piano was
one thing the Yankees couldn't carry away.  Is it terribly out of
tune, Suellen?"

"Dreadfully," answered Suellen, happily beckoning with a smile to
Frank.

But as they all passed from the room, Frank hung back, tugging at
Scarlett's sleeve.

"May I speak to you alone?"

For an awful moment she feared he was going to ask about her
livestock and she braced herself for a good lie.

When the room was cleared and they stood by the fire, all the false
cheerfulness which had colored Frank's face in front of the others
passed and she saw that he looked like an old man.  His face was as
dried and brown as the leaves that were blowing about the lawn of
Tara and his ginger-colored whiskers were thin and scraggly and
streaked with gray.  He clawed at them absently and cleared his
throat in an annoying way before he spoke.

"I'm sorry about your ma, Miss Scarlett."

"Please don't talk about it."

"And your pa--  Has he been this way since--?"

"Yes--he's--he's not himself, as you can see."

"He sure set a store by her."

"Oh, Mr. Kennedy, please don't let's talk--"

"I'm sorry, Miss Scarlett," and he shuffled his feet nervously.
"The truth is I wanted to take up something with your pa and now I
see it won't do any good."

"Perhaps I can help you, Mr. Kennedy.  You see--I'm the head of the
house now."

"Well, I," began Frank and again clawed nervously at his beard.
"The truth is--  Well, Miss Scarlett, I was aiming to ask him for
Miss Suellen."

"Do you mean to tell me," cried Scarlett in amused amazement, "that
you haven't yet asked Pa for Suellen?  And you've been courting her
for years!"

He flushed and grinned embarrassedly and in general looked like a
shy and sheepish boy.

"Well, I--I didn't know if she'd have me.  I'm so much older than
she is and--there were so many good-looking young bucks hanging
around Tara--"

"Hump!" thought Scarlett, "they were hanging around me, not her!"

"And I don't know yet if she'll have me.  I've never asked her but
she must know how I feel.  I--I thought I'd ask Mr. O'Hara's
permission and tell him the truth.  Miss Scarlett, I haven't got a
cent now.  I used to have a lot of money, if you'll forgive me
mentioning it, but right now all I own is my horse and the clothes
I've got on.  You see, when I enlisted I sold most of my land and I
put all my money in Confederate bonds and you know what they're
worth now.  Less than the paper they're printed on.  And anyway, I
haven't got them now, because they burned up when the Yankees
burned my sister's house.  I know I've got gall asking for Miss
Suellen now when I haven't a cent but--well, it's this way.  I got
to thinking that we don't know how things are going to turn out
about this war.  It sure looks like the end of the world for me.
There's nothing we can be sure of and--and I thought it would be a
heap of comfort to me and maybe to her if we were engaged.  That
would be something sure.  I wouldn't ask to marry her till I could
take care of her, Miss Scarlett, and I don't know when that will
be.  But if true love carries any weight with you, you can be
certain Miss Suellen will be rich in that if nothing else."

He spoke the last words with a simple dignity that touched
Scarlett, even in her amusement.  It was beyond her comprehension
that anyone could love Suellen.  Her sister seemed to her a monster
of selfishness, of complaints and of what she could only describe
as pure cussedness.

"Why, Mr. Kennedy," she said kindly, "it's quite all right.  I'm
sure I can speak for Pa.  He always set a store by you and he
always expected Suellen to marry you."

"Did he now?" cried Frank, happiness in his face.

"Indeed yes," answered Scarlett, concealing a grin as she
remembered how frequently Gerald had rudely bellowed across the
supper table to Suellen:  "How now, Missy!  Hasn't your ardent beau
popped the question yet?  Shall I be asking him his intentions?"

"I shall ask her tonight," he said, his face quivering, and he
clutched her hand and shook it.  "You're so kind, Miss Scarlett."

"I'll send her to you," smiled Scarlett, starting for the parlor.
Melanie was beginning to play.  The piano was sadly out of tune but
some of the chords were musical and Melanie was raising her voice
to lead the others in "Hark, the Herald Angels Sing!"

Scarlett paused.  It did not seem possible that war had swept over
them twice, that they were living in a ravaged country, close to
the border of starvation, when this old sweet Christmas hymn was
being sung.  Abruptly she turned to Frank.

"What did you mean when you said it looked like the end of the
world to you?"

"I'll talk frankly," he said slowly, "but I wouldn't want you to be
alarming the other ladies with what I say.  The war can't go on
much longer.  There aren't any fresh men to fill the ranks and the
desertions are running high--higher than the army likes to admit.
You see, the men can't stand to be away from their families when
they know they're starving, so they go home to try to provide for
them.  I can't blame them but it weakens the army.  And the army
can't fight without food and there isn't any food.  I know because,
you see, getting food is my business.  I've been all up and down
this section since we retook Atlanta and there isn't enough to feed
a jaybird.  It's the same way for three hundred miles south to
Savannah.  The folks are starving and the railroads are torn up and
there aren't any new rifles and the ammunition is giving out and
there's no leather at all for shoes. . . .  So, you see, the end is
almost here."

But the fading hopes of the Confederacy weighed less heavily on
Scarlett than his remark about the scarcity of food.  It had been
her intention to send Pork out with the horse and wagon, the gold
pieces and the United States money to scour the countryside for
provisions and material for clothes.  But if what Frank said was
true--

But Macon hadn't fallen.  There must be food in Macon.  Just as
soon as the commissary department was safely on its way, she'd
start Pork for Macon and take the chance of having the precious
horse picked up by the army.  She'd have to risk it.

"Well, let's don't talk about unpleasant things tonight, Mr.
Kennedy," she said.  "You go and sit in Mother's little office and
I'll send Suellen to you so you can--well, so you'll have a little
privacy."

Blushing, smiling, Frank slipped out of the room and Scarlett
watched him go.

"What a pity he can't marry her now," she thought.  "That would be
one less mouth to feed."



CHAPTER XXIX


The following April General Johnston, who had been given back the
shattered remnants of his old command, surrendered them in North
Carolina and the war was over.  But not until two weeks later did
the news reach Tara.  There was too much to do at Tara for anyone
to waste time traveling abroad and hearing gossip and, as the
neighbors were just as busy as they, there was little visiting and
news spread slowly.

Spring plowing was at its height and the cotton and garden seed
Pork had brought from Macon was being put into the ground.  Pork
had been almost worthless since the trip, so proud was he of
returning safely with his wagon-load of dress goods, seed, fowls,
hams, side meat and meal.  Over and over, he told the story of his
many narrow escapes, of the bypaths and country lanes he had taken
on his return to Tara, the unfrequented roads, the old trails, the
bridle paths.  He had been five weeks on the road, agonizing weeks
for Scarlett.  But she did not upbraid him on his return, for she
was happy that he had made the trip successfully and pleased that
he brought back so much of the money she had given him.  She had a
shrewd suspicion that the reason he had so much money left over was
that he had not bought the fowls or most of the food.  Pork would
have taken shame to himself had he spent her money when there were
unguarded hen coops along the road and smokehouses handy.

Now that they had a little food, everyone at Tara was busy trying
to restore some semblance of naturalness to life.  There was work
for every pair of hands, too much work, never-ending work.  The
withered stalks of last year's cotton had to be removed to make way
for this year's seeds and the balky horse, unaccustomed to the
plow, dragged unwillingly through the fields.  Weeds had to be
pulled from the garden and the seeds planted, firewood had to be
cut, a beginning had to be made toward replacing the pens and the
miles and miles of fences so casually burned by the Yankees.  The
snares Pork set for rabbits had to be visited twice a day and the
fishlines in the river rebaited.  There were beds to be made and
floors to be swept, food to be cooked and dishes washed, hogs and
chickens to be fed and eggs gathered.  The cow had to be milked and
pastured near the swamp and someone had to watch her all day for
fear the Yankees or Frank Kennedy's men would return and take her.
Even little Wade had his duties.  Every morning he went out
importantly with a basket to pick up twigs and chips to start the
fires with.

It was the Fontaine boys, the first of the County men home from the
war, who brought the news of the surrender.  Alex, who still had
boots, was walking and Tony, barefooted, was riding on the bare
back of a mule.  Tony always managed to get the best of things in
that family.  They were swarthier than ever from four years'
exposure to sun and storm, thinner, more wiry, and the wild black
beards they brought back from the war made them seem like
strangers.

On their way to Mimosa and eager for home, they only stopped a
moment at Tara to kiss the girls and give them news of the
surrender.  It was all over, they said, all finished, and they did
not seem to care much or want to talk about it.  All they wanted to
know was whether Mimosa had been burned.  On the way south from
Atlanta, they had passed chimney after chimney where the homes of
friends had stood and it seemed almost too much to hope that their
own house had been spared.  They sighed with relief at the welcome
news and laughed, slapping their thighs when Scarlett told them of
Sally's wild ride and how neatly she had cleared their hedge.

"She's a spunky girl," said Tony, "and it's rotten luck for her,
Joe getting killed.  You all got any chewing tobacco, Scarlett?"

"Nothing but rabbit tobacco.  Pa smokes it in a corn cob."

"I haven't fallen that low yet," said Tony, "but I'll probably come
to it."

"Is Dimity Munroe all right?" asked Alex, eagerly but a little
embarrassed, and Scarlett recalled vaguely that he had been sweet
on Sally's younger sister.

"Oh, yes.  She's living with her aunt over in Fayetteville now.
You know their house in Lovejoy was burned.  And the rest of her
folks are in Macon."

"What he means is--has Dimity married some brave colonel in the
Home Guard?" jeered Tony, and Alex turned furious eyes upon him.

"Of course, she isn't married," said Scarlett, amused.

"Maybe it would be better if she had," said Alex gloomily.  "How
the hell--I beg your pardon, Scarlett.  But how can a man ask a
girl to marry him when his darkies are all freed and his stock gone
and he hasn't got a cent in his pockets?"

"You know that wouldn't bother Dimity," said Scarlett.  She could
afford to be loyal to Dimity and say nice things about her, for
Alex Fontaine had never been one of her own beaux.

"Hell's afire--  Well, I beg your pardon again.  I'll have to quit
swearing or Grandma will sure tan my hide.  I'm not asking any girl
to marry a pauper.  It mightn't bother her but it would bother me."

While Scarlett talked to the boys on the front porch, Melanie,
Suellen and Carreen slipped silently into the house as soon as they
heard the news of the surrender.  After the boys had gone, cutting
across the back fields of Tara toward home, Scarlett went inside
and heard the girls sobbing together on the sofa in Ellen's little
office.  It was all over, the bright beautiful dream they had loved
and hoped for, the Cause which had taken their friends, lovers,
husbands and beggared their families.  The Cause they had thought
could never fall had fallen forever.

But for Scarlett, there were no tears.  In the first moment when
she heard the news she thought:  Thank God!  Now the cow won't be
stolen.  Now the horse is safe.  Now we can take the silver out of
the well and everybody can have a knife and fork.  Now I won't be
afraid to drive round the country looking for something to eat.

What a relief!  Never again would she start in fear at the sound of
hooves.  Never again would she wake in the dark nights, holding her
breath to listen, wondering if it were reality or only a dream that
she heard in the yard the rattle of bits, the stamping of hooves
and the harsh crying of orders by the Yankees.  And, best of all,
Tara was safe!  Now her worst nightmare would never come true.  Now
she would never have to stand on the lawn and see smoke billowing
from the beloved house and hear the roar of flames as the roof fell
in.

Yes, the Cause was dead but war had always seemed foolish to her
and peace was better.  She had never stood starry eyed when the
Stars and Bars ran up a pole or felt cold chills when "Dixie"
sounded.  She had not been sustained through privations, the
sickening duties of nursing, the fears of the siege and the hunger
of the last few months by the fanatic glow which made all these
things endurable to others, if only the Cause prospered.  It was
all over and done with and she was not going to cry about it.

All over!  The war which had seemed so endless, the war which,
unbidden and unwanted, had cut her life in two, had made so clean a
cleavage that it was difficult to remember those other care-free
days.  She could look back, unmoved, at the pretty Scarlett with
her fragile green morocco slippers and her flounces fragrant with
lavender but she wondered if she could be that same girl.  Scarlett
O'Hara, with the County at her feet, a hundred slaves to do her
bidding, the wealth of Tara like a wall behind her and doting
parents anxious to grant any desire of her heart.  Spoiled,
careless Scarlett who had never known an ungratified wish except
where Ashley was concerned.

Somewhere, on the long road that wound through those four years,
the girl with her sachet and dancing slippers had slipped away and
there was left a woman with sharp green eyes, who counted pennies
and turned her hands to many menial tasks, a woman to whom nothing
was left from the wreckage except the indestructible red earth on
which she stood.

As she stood in the hall, listening to the girls sobbing, her mind
was busy.

"We'll plant more cotton, lots more.  I'll send Pork to Macon
tomorrow to buy more seed.  Now the Yankees won't burn it and our
troops won't need it.  Good Lord!  Cotton ought to go sky high this
fall!"

She went into the little office and, disregarding the weeping girls
on the sofa, seated herself at the secretary and picked up a quill
to balance the cost of more cotton seed against her remaining cash.

"The war is over," she thought and suddenly she dropped the quill
as a wild happiness flooded her.  The war was over and Ashley--if
Ashley was alive he'd be coming home!  She wondered if Melanie, in
the midst of mourning for the lost Cause, had thought of this.

"Soon we'll get a letter--no, not a letter.  We can't get letters.
But soon--oh, somehow he'll let us know!"

But the days passed into weeks and there was no news from Ashley.
The mail service in the South was uncertain and in the rural
districts there was none at all.  Occasionally a passing traveler
from Atlanta brought a note from Aunt Pitty tearfully begging the
girls to come back.  But never news of Ashley.



After the surrender, an ever-present feud over the horse smoldered
between Scarlett and Suellen.  Now that there was no danger of
Yankees, Suellen wanted to go calling on the neighbors.  Lonely and
missing the happy sociability of the old days, Suellen longed to
visit friends, if for no other reason than to assure herself that
the rest of the County was as bad off as Tara.  But Scarlett was
adamant.  The horse was for work, to drag logs from the woods, to
plow and for Pork to ride in search of food.  On Sundays he had
earned the right to graze in the pasture and rest.  If Suellen
wanted to go visiting she could go afoot.

Before the last year Suellen had never walked a hundred yards in
her life and this prospect was anything but pleasing.  So she
stayed at home and nagged and cried and said, once too often:  "Oh,
if only Mother was here!"  At that, Scarlett gave her the long-
promised slap, hitting her so hard it knocked her screaming to the
bed and caused great consternation throughout the house.
Thereafter, Suellen whined the less, at least in Scarlett's
presence.

Scarlett spoke truthfully when she said she wanted the horse to
rest but that was only half of the truth.  The other half was that
she had paid one round of calls on the County in the first month
after the surrender and the sight of old friends and old
plantations had shaken her courage more than she liked to admit.

The Fontaines had fared best of any, thanks to Sally's hard ride,
but it was flourishing only by comparison with the desperate
situation of the other neighbors.  Grandma Fontaine had never
completely recovered from the heart attack she had the day she led
the others in beating out the flames and saving the house.  Old Dr.
Fontaine was convalescing slowly from an amputated arm.  Alex and
Tony were turning awkward hands to plows and hoe handles.  They
leaned over the fence rail to shake hands with Scarlett when she
called and they laughed at her rickety wagon, their black eyes
bitter, for they were laughing at themselves as well as her.  She
asked to buy seed corn from them and they promised it and fell to
discussing farm problems.  They had twelve chickens, two cows, five
hogs and the mule they brought home from the war.  One of the hogs
had just died and they were worried about losing the others.  At
hearing such serious words about hogs from these ex-dandies who had
never given life a more serious thought than which cravat was most
fashionable, Scarlett laughed and this time her laugh was bitter
too.

They had all made her welcome at Mimosa and had insisted on giving,
not selling, her the seed corn.  The quick Fontaine tempers flared
when she put a greenback on the table and they flatly refused
payment.  Scarlett took the corn and privately slipped a dollar
bill into Sally's hand.  Sally looked like a different person from
the girl who had greeted her eight months before when Scarlett
first came home to Tara.  Then she had been pale and sad but there
had been a buoyancy about her.  Now that buoyancy had gone, as if
the surrender had taken all hope from her.

"Scarlett," she whispered as she clutched the bill, "what was the
good of it all?  Why did we ever fight?  Oh, my poor Joe!  Oh, my
poor baby!"

"I don't know why we fought and I don't care," said Scarlett.  "And
I'm not interested.  I never was interested.  War is a man's
business, not a woman's.  All I'm interested in now is a good
cotton crop.  Now take this dollar and buy little Joe a dress.  God
knows, he needs it.  I'm not going to rob you of your corn, for all
Alex and Tony's politeness."

The boys followed her to the wagon and assisted her in, courtly for
all their rags, gay with the volatile Fontaine gaiety, but with the
picture of their destitution in her eyes, she shivered as she drove
away from Mimosa.  She was so tired of poverty and pinching.  What
a pleasure it would be to know people who were rich and not worried
as to where the next meal was coming from!

Cade Calvert was at home at Pine Bloom and, as Scarlett came up the
steps of the old house in which she had danced so often in happier
days, she saw that death was in his face.  He was emaciated and he
coughed as he lay in an easy chair in the sunshine with a shawl
across his knees, but his face lit up when he saw her.  Just a
little cold which had settled in his chest, he said, trying to rise
to greet her.  Got it from sleeping so much in the rain.  But it
would be gone soon and then he'd lend a hand in the work.

Cathleen Calvert, who came out of the house at the sound of voices,
met Scarlett's eyes above her brother's head and in them Scarlett
read knowledge and bitter despair.  Cade might not know but
Cathleen knew.  Pine Bloom looked straggly and overgrown with
weeds, seedling pines were beginning to show in the fields and the
house was sagging and untidy.  Cathleen was thin and taut.

The two of them, with their Yankee stepmother, their four little
half-sisters, and Hilton, the Yankee overseer, remained in the
silent, oddly echoing house.  Scarlett had never liked Hilton any
more than she liked their own overseer Jonas Wilkerson, and she
liked him even less now, as he sauntered forward and greeted her
like an equal.  Formerly he had the same combination of servility
and impertinence which Wilkerson possessed but now, with Mr.
Calvert and Raiford dead in the war and Cade sick, he had dropped
all servility.  The second Mrs. Calvert had never known how to
compel respect from negro servants and it was not to be expected
that she could get it from a white man.

"Mr. Hilton has been so kind about staying with us through these
difficult times," said Mrs. Calvert nervously, casting quick
glances at her silent stepdaughter.  "Very kind.  I suppose you
heard how he saved our house twice when Sherman was here.  I'm sure
I don't know how we would have managed without him, with no money
and Cade--"

A flush went over Cade's white face and Cathleen's long lashes
veiled her eyes as her mouth hardened.  Scarlett knew their souls
were writhing in helpless rage at being under obligations to their
Yankee overseer.  Mrs. Calvert seemed ready to weep.  She had
somehow made a blunder.  She was always blundering.  She just
couldn't understand Southerners, for all that she had lived in
Georgia twenty years.  She never knew what not to say to her
stepchildren and, no matter what she said or did, they were always
so exquisitely polite to her.  Silently she vowed she would go
North to her own people, taking her children with her, and leave
these puzzling stiff-necked strangers.

After these visits, Scarlett had no desire to see the Tarletons.
Now that the four boys were gone, the house burned and the family
cramped in the overseer's cottage, she could not bring herself to
go.  But Suellen and Carreen begged and Melanie said it would be
unneighborly not to call and welcome Mr. Tarleton back from the
war, so one Sunday they went.

This was the worst of all.

As they drove up by the ruins of the house, they saw Beatrice
Tarleton dressed in a worn riding habit, a crop under her arm,
sitting on the top rail of the fence about the paddock, staring
moodily at nothing.  Beside her perched the bow-legged little negro
who had trained her horses and he looked as glum as his mistress.
The paddock, once full of frolicking colts and placid brood mares,
was empty now except for one mule, the mule Mr. Tarleton had ridden
home from the surrender.

"I swear I don't know what to do with myself now that my darlings
are gone," said Mrs. Tarleton, climbing down from the fence.  A
stranger might have thought she spoke of her four dead sons, but
the girls from Tara knew her horses were in her mind.  "All my
beautiful horses dead.  And oh, my poor Nellie!  If I just had
Nellie!  And nothing but a damned mule on the place.  A damned
mule," she repeated, looking indignantly at the scrawny beast.
"It's an insult to the memory of my blooded darlings to have a mule
in their paddock.  Mules are misbegotten, unnatural critters and it
ought to be illegal to breed them."

Jim Tarleton, completely disguised by a bushy beard, came out of
the overseer's house to welcome and kiss the girls and his four
red-haired daughters in mended dresses streamed out behind him,
tripping over the dozen black and tan hounds which ran barking to
the door at the sound of strange voices.  There was an air of
studied and determined cheerfulness about the whole family which
brought a colder chill to Scarlett's bones than the bitterness of
Mimosa or the deathly brooding of Pine Bloom.

The Tarletons insisted that the girls stay for dinner, saying they
had so few guests these days and wanted to hear all the news.
Scarlett did not want to linger, for the atmosphere oppressed her,
but Melanie and her two sisters were anxious for a longer visit, so
the four stayed for dinner and ate sparingly of the side meat and
dried peas which were served them.

There was laughter about the skimpy fare and the Tarleton girls
giggled as they told of makeshifts for clothes, as if they were
telling the most amusing of jokes.  Melanie met them halfway,
surprising Scarlett with her unexpected vivacity as she told of
trials at Tara, making light of hardships.  Scarlett could hardly
speak at all.  The room seemed so empty without the four great
Tarleton boys, lounging and smoking and teasing.  And if it seemed
empty to her, what must it seem to the Tarletons who were offering
a smiling front to their neighbors?

Carreen had said little during the meal but when it was over she
slipped over to Mrs. Tarleton's side and whispered something.  Mrs.
Tarleton's face changed and the brittle smile left her lips as she
put her arm around Carreen's slender waist.  They left the room,
and Scarlett, who felt she could not endure the house another
minute, followed them.  They went down the path through the garden
and Scarlett saw they were going toward the burying ground.  Well,
she couldn't go back to the house now.  It would seem too rude.
But what on earth did Carreen mean dragging Mrs. Tarleton out to
the boys' graves when Beatrice was trying so hard to be brave?

There were two new marble markers in the brick-inclosed lot under
the funereal cedars--so new that no rain had splashed them with red
dust.

"We got them last week," said Mrs. Tarleton proudly.  "Mr. Tarleton
went to Macon and brought them home in the wagon."

Tombstones!  And what they must have cost!  Suddenly Scarlett did
not feel as sorry for the Tarletons as she had at first.  Anybody
who would waste precious money on tombstones when food was so dear,
so almost unattainable, didn't deserve sympathy.  And there were
several lines carved on each of the stones.  The more carving, the
more money.  The whole family must be crazy!  And it had cost
money, too, to bring the three boys' bodies home.  They had never
found Boyd or any trace of him.

Between the graves of Brent and Stuart was a stone which read:
"They were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death
they were not divided."

On the other stone were the names of Boyd and Tom with something in
Latin which began "Dulce et--" but it meant nothing to Scarlett who
had managed to evade Latin at the Fayetteville Academy.

All that money for tombstones!  Why, they were fools!  She felt as
indignant as if her own money had been squandered.

Carreen's eyes were shining oddly.

"I think it's lovely," she whispered pointing to the first stone.

Carreen would think it lovely.  Anything sentimental stirred her.

"Yes," said Mrs. Tarleton and her voice was soft, "we thought it
very fitting--they died almost at the same time.  Stuart first and
then Brent who caught up the flag he dropped."

As the girls drove back to Tara, Scarlett was silent for a while,
thinking of what she had seen in the various homes, remembering
against her will the County in its glory, with visitors at all the
big houses and money plentiful, negroes crowding the quarters and
the well-tended fields glorious with cotton.

"In another year, there'll be little pines all over these fields,"
she thought and looking toward the encircling forest she shuddered.
"Without the darkies, it will be all we can do to keep body and
soul together.  Nobody can run a big plantation without the
darkies, and lots of the fields won't be cultivated at all and the
woods will take over the fields again.  Nobody can plant much
cotton, and what will we do then?  What'll become of country folks?
Town folks can manage somehow.  They've always managed.  But we
country folks will go back a hundred years like the pioneers who
had little cabins and just scratched a few acres--and barely
existed.

"No--" she thought grimly, "Tara isn't going to be like that.  Not
even if I have to plow myself.  This whole section, this whole
state can go back to woods if it wants to, but I won't let Tara go.
And I don't intend to waste my money on tombstones or my time
crying about the war.  We can make out somehow.  I know we could
make out somehow if the men weren't all dead.  Losing the darkies
isn't the worst part about this.  It's the loss of the men, the
young men."  She thought again of the four Tarletons and Joe
Fontaine, of Raiford Calvert and the Munroe brothers and all the
boys from Fayetteville and Jonesboro whose names she had read on
the casualty lists.  "If there were just enough men left, we could
manage somehow but--"

Another thought struck her--suppose she wanted to marry again.  Of
course, she didn't want to marry again.  Once was certainly enough.
Besides, the only man she'd ever wanted was Ashley and he was
married if he was still living.  But suppose she would want to
marry.  Who would there be to marry her?  The thought was
appalling.

"Melly," she said, "what's going to happen to Southern girls?"

"What do you mean?"

"Just what I say.  What's going to happen to them?  There's no one
to marry them.  Why, Melly, with all the boys dead, there'll be
thousands of girls all over the South who'll die old maids."

"And never have any children," added Melanie, to whom this was the
most important thing.

Evidently the thought was not new to Suellen who sat in the back of
the wagon, for she suddenly began to cry.  She had not heard from
Frank Kennedy since Christmas.  She did not know if the lack of
mail service was the cause, or if he had merely trifled with her
affections and then forgotten her.  Or maybe he had been killed in
the last days of the war!  The latter would have been infinitely
preferable to his forgetting her, for at least there was some
dignity about a dead love, such as Carreen and India Wilkes had,
but none about a deserted fiancee.

"Oh, in the name of God, hush!" said Scarlett.

"Oh, you can talk," sobbed Suellen, "because you've been married
and had a baby and everybody knows some man wanted you.  But look
at me!  And you've got to be mean and throw it up to me that I'm an
old maid when I can't help myself.  I think you're hateful."

"Oh, hush!  You know how I hate people who bawl all the time.  You
know perfectly well old Ginger Whiskers isn't dead and that he'll
come back and marry you.  He hasn't any better sense.  But
personally, I'd rather be an old maid than marry him."

There was silence from the back of the wagon for a while and
Carreen comforted her sister with absent-minded pats, for her mind
was a long way off, riding paths three years old with Brent
Tarleton beside her.  There was a glow, an exaltation in her eyes.

"Ah," said Melanie, sadly, "what will the South be like without all
our fine boys?  What would the South have been if they had lived?
We could use their courage and their energy and their brains.
Scarlett, all of us with little boys must raise them to take the
places of the men who are gone, to be brave men like them."

"There will never again be men like them," said Carreen softly.
"No one can take their places."

They drove home the rest of the way in silence,



One day not long after this, Cathleen Calvert rode up to Tara at
sunset.  Her sidesaddle was strapped on as sorry a mule as Scarlett
had ever seen, a flop-eared lame brute, and Cathleen was almost as
sorry looking as the animal she rode.  Her dress was of faded
gingham of the type once worn only by house servants, and her
sunbonnet was secured under her chin by a piece of twine.  She rode
up to the front porch but did not dismount, and Scarlett and
Melanie, who had been watching the sunset, went down the steps to
meet her.  Cathleen was as white as Cade had been the day Scarlett
called, white and hard and brittle, as if her face would shatter if
she spoke.  But her back was erect and her head was high as she
nodded to them.

Scarlett suddenly remembered the day of the Wilkes barbecue when
she and Cathleen had whispered together about Rhett Butler.  How
pretty and fresh Cathleen had been that day in a swirl of blue
organdie with fragrant roses at her sash and little black velvet
slippers laced about her small ankles.  And now there was not a
trace of that girl in the stiff figure sitting on the mule.

"I won't get down, thank you," she said.  "I just came to tell you
that I'm going to be married."

"What!"

"Who to?"

"Cathy, how grand!"

"When?"

"Tomorrow," said Cathleen quietly and there was something in her
voice which took the eager smiles from their faces.  "I came to
tell you that I'm going to be married tomorrow, in Jonesboro--and
I'm not inviting you all to come."

They digested this in silence, looking up at her, puzzled.  Then
Melanie spoke.

"Is it someone we know, dear?"

"Yes," said Cathleen, shortly.  "It's Mr. Hilton."

"Mr. Hilton?"

"Yes, Mr. Hilton, our overseer."

Scarlett could not even find voice to say "Oh!" but Cathleen,
peering down suddenly at Melanie, said in a low savage voice:  "If
you cry, Melly, I can't stand it.  I shall die!"

Melanie said nothing but patted the foot in its awkward home-made
shoe which hung from the stirrup.  Her head was low.

"And don't pat me!  I can't stand that either."

Melanie dropped her hand but still did not look up.

"Well, I must go.  I only came to tell you."  The white brittle
mask was back again and she picked up the reins.

"How is Cade?" asked Scarlett, utterly at a loss but fumbling for
some words to break the awkward silence.

"He is dying," said Cathleen shortly.  There seemed to be no
feeling in her voice.  "And he is going to die in some comfort and
peace if I can manage it, without worry about who will take care of
me when he's gone.  You see, my stepmother and the children are
going North for good, tomorrow.  Well, I must be going."

Melanie looked up and met Cathleen's hard eyes.  There were bright
tears on Melanie's lashes and understanding in her eyes, and before
them, Cathleen's lips curved into the crooked smile of a brave
child who tries not to cry.  It was all very bewildering to
Scarlett who was still trying to grasp the idea that Cathleen
Calvert was going to marry an overseer--Cathleen, daughter of a
rich planter, Cathleen who, next to Scarlett, had had more beaux
than any girl in the County.

Cathleen bent down and Melanie tiptoed.  They kissed.  Then
Cathleen flapped the bridle reins sharply and the old mule moved
off.

Melanie looked after her, the tears streaming down her face.
Scarlett stared, still dazed.

"Melly, is she crazy?  You know she can't be in love with him."

"In love?  Oh, Scarlett, don't even suggest such a horrid thing!
Oh, poor Cathleen!  Poor Cade!"

"Fiddle-dee-dee!" cried Scarlett, beginning to be irritated.  It
was annoying that Melanie always seemed to grasp more of situations
than she herself did.  Cathleen's plight seemed to her more
startling than catastrophic.  Of course it was no pleasant thought,
marrying Yankee white trash, but after all a girl couldn't live
alone on a plantation; she had to have a husband to help her run
it.

"Melly, it's like I said the other day.  There isn't anybody for
girls to marry and they've got to marry someone."

"Oh, they don't have to marry!  There's nothing shameful in being a
spinster.  Look at Aunt Pitty.  Oh, I'd rather see Cathleen dead!
I know Cade would rather see her dead.  It's the end of the
Calverts.  Just think what her--what their children will be.  Oh,
Scarlett, have Pork saddle the horse quickly and you ride after her
and tell her to come live with us!"

"Good Lord!" cried Scarlett, shocked at the matter-of-fact way in
which Melanie was offering Tara.  Scarlett certainly had no
intention of feeding another mouth.  She started to say this but
something in Melanie's stricken face halted the words.

"She wouldn't come, Melly," she amended.  "You know she wouldn't.
She's so proud and she'd think it was charity."

"That's true, that's true!" said Melanie distractedly, watching the
small cloud of red dust disappear down the road.

"You've been with me for months," thought Scarlett grimly, looking
at her sister-in-law, "and it's never occurred to you that it's
charity you're living on.  And I guess it never will.  You're one
of those people the war didn't change and you go right on thinking
and acting just like nothing had happened--like we were still rich
as Croesus and had more food than we know what to do with and
guests didn't matter.  I guess I've got you on my neck for the rest
of my life.  But I won't have Cathleen too."



CHAPTER XXX


In that warm summer after peace came, Tara suddenly lost its
isolation.  And for months thereafter a stream of scarecrows,
bearded, ragged, footsore and always hungry, toiled up the red hill
to Tara and came to rest on the shady front steps, wanting food and
a night's lodging.  They were Confederate soldiers walking home.
The railroad had carried the remains of Johnston's army from North
Carolina to Atlanta and dumped them there, and from Atlanta they
began their pilgrimages afoot.  When the wave of Johnston's men had
passed, the weary veterans from the Army of Virginia arrived and
then men from the Western troops, beating their way south toward
homes which might not exist and families which might be scattered
or dead.  Most of them were walking, a few fortunate ones rode bony
horses and mules which the terms of the surrender had permitted
them to keep, gaunt animals which even an untrained eye could tell
would never reach far-away Florida and south Georgia.

Going home!  Going home!  That was the only thought in the
soldiers' minds.  Some were sad and silent, others gay and
contemptuous of hardships, but the thought that it was all over and
they were going home was the one thing that sustained them.  Few of
them were bitter.  They left bitterness to their women and their
old people.  They had fought a good fight, had been licked and were
willing to settle down peaceably to plowing beneath the flag they
had fought.

Going home!  Going home!  They could talk of nothing else, neither
battles nor wounds, nor imprisonment nor the future.  Later, they
would refight battles and tell children and grandchildren of pranks
and forays and charges, of hunger, forced marches and wounds, but
not now.  Some of them lacked an arm or a leg or an eye, many had
scars which would ache in rainy weather if they lived for seventy
years but these seemed small matters now.  Later it would be
different.

Old and young, talkative and taciturn, rich planter and sallow
Cracker, they all had two things in common, lice and dysentery.
The Confederate soldier was so accustomed to his verminous state he
did not give it a thought and scratched unconcernedly even in the
presence of ladies.  As for dysentery--the "bloody flux" as the
ladies delicately called it--it seemed to have spared no one from
private to general.  Four years of half-starvation, four years of
rations which were coarse or green or half-putrefied, had done its
work with them and every soldier who stopped at Tara was either
just recovering or was actively suffering from it.

"Dey ain' a soun' set of bowels in de whole Confedrut ahmy,"
observed Mammy darkly as she sweated over the fire, brewing a
bitter concoction of blackberry roots which had been Ellen's
sovereign remedy for such afflictions.  "It's mah notion dat
'twarn't de Yankees whut beat our gempmum.  'Twuz dey own innards.
Kain no gempmum fight wid his bowels tuhnin' ter water."

One and all, Mammy dosed them, never waiting to ask foolish
questions about the state of their organs and, one and all, they
drank her doses meekly and with wry faces, remembering, perhaps,
other stern black faces in far-off places and other inexorable
black hands holding medicine spoons.

In the matter of "comp'ny" Mammy was equally adamant.  No lice-
ridden soldier should come into Tara.  She marched them behind a
clump of thick bushes, relieved them of their uniforms, gave them a
basin of water and strong lye soap to wash with and provided them
with quilts and blankets to cover their nakedness, while she boiled
their clothing in her huge wash pot.  It was useless for the girls
to argue hotly that such conduct humiliated the soldiers.  Mammy
replied that the girls would be a sight more humiliated if they
found lice upon themselves.

When the soldiers began arriving almost daily, Mammy protested
against their being allowed to use the bedrooms.  Always she feared
lest some louse had escaped her.  Rather than argue the matter,
Scarlett turned the parlor with its deep velvet rug into a
dormitory.  Mammy cried out equally loudly at the sacrilege of
soldiers being permitted to sleep on Miss Ellen's rug but Scarlett
was firm.  They had to sleep somewhere.  And, in the months after
the surrender, the deep soft nap began to show signs of wear and
finally the heavy warp and woof showed through in spots where heels
had worn it and spurs dug carelessly.

Of each soldier, they asked eagerly of Ashley.  Suellen, bridling,
always asked news of Mr. Kennedy.  But none of the soldiers had
ever heard of them nor were they inclined to talk about the
missing.  It was enough that they themselves were alive, and they
did not care to think of the thousands in unmarked graves who would
never come home.

The family tried to bolster Melanie's courage after each of these
disappointments.  Of course, Ashley hadn't died in prison.  Some
Yankee chaplain would have written if this were true.  Of course,
he was coming home but his prison was so far away.  Why, goodness,
it took days riding on a train to make the trip and if Ashley was
walking, like these men . . .  Why hadn't he written?  Well,
darling, you know what the mails are now--so uncertain and slipshod
even where mail routes are re-established.  But suppose--suppose he
had died on the way home.  Now, Melanie, some Yankee woman would
have surely written us about it! . . .  Yankee women!  Bah! . . .
Melly, there ARE some nice Yankee women.  Oh, yes, there are!  God
couldn't make a whole nation without having some nice women in it!
Scarlett, you remember we did meet a nice Yankee woman at Saratoga
that time--Scarlett, tell Melly about her!

"Nice, my foot!" replied Scarlert.  "She asked me how many
bloodhounds we kept to chase our darkies with!  I agree with Melly.
I never saw a nice Yankee, male or female.  But don't cry, Melly!
Ashley'll come home.  It's a long walk and maybe--maybe he hasn't
got any boots."

Then at the thought of Ashley barefooted, Scarlett could have
cried.  Let other soldiers limp by in rags with their feet tied up
in sacks and strips of carpet, but not Ashley.  He should come home
on a prancing horse, dressed in fine clothes and shining boots, a
plume in his hat.  It was the final degradation for her to think of
Ashley reduced to the state of these other soldiers.

One afternoon in June when everyone at Tara was assembled on the
back porch eagerly watching Pork cut the first half-ripe watermelon
of the season, they heard hooves on the gravel of the front drive.
Prissy started languidly toward the front door, while those left
behind argued hotly as to whether they should hide the melon or
keep it for supper, should the caller at the door prove to be a
soldier.

Melly and Carreen whispered that the soldier guest should have a
share and Scarlett, backed by Suellen and Mammy, hissed to Pork to
hide it quickly.

"Don't be a goose, girls!  There's not enough for us as it is and
if there are two or three famished soldiers out there, none of us
will even get a taste," said Scarlett.

While Pork stood with the little melon clutched to him, uncertain
as to the final decision, they heard Prissy cry out.

"Gawdlmighty!  Miss Scarlett!  Miss Melly!  Come quick!"

"Who is it?" cried Scarlett, leaping up from the steps and racing
through the hall with Melly at her shoulder and the others
streaming after her.

Ashley! she thought.  Oh, perhaps--

"It's Uncle Peter!  Miss Pittypat's Uncle Peter!"

They all ran out to the front porch and saw the tall grizzled old
despot of Aunt Pitty's house climbing down from a rat-tailed nag on
which a section of quilting had been strapped.  On his wide black
face, accustomed dignity strove with delight at seeing old friends,
with the result that his brow was furrowed in a frown but his mouth
was hanging open like a happy toothless old hound's.

Everyone ran down the steps to greet him, black and white shaking
his hand and asking questions, but Melly's voice rose above them
all.

"Auntie isn't sick, is she?"

"No'm.  She's po'ly, thank God," answered Peter, fastening a severe
look first on Melly and then on Scarlett, so that they suddenly
felt guilty but could think of no reason why.  "She's po'ly but she
is plum outdone wid you young Misses, an' ef it come right down to
it, Ah is too!"

"Why!  Uncle Peter!  What on earth--"

"Y'all nee'n try ter 'scuse you'seffs.  Ain' Miss Pitty writ you
an' writ you ter come home?  Ain' Ah seed her write an' seed her
a-cryin' w'en y'all writ her back dat you got too much ter do on
disyere ole farm ter come home?"

"But, Uncle Peter--"

"Huccome you leave Miss Pitty by herseff lak dis w'en she so scary
lak?  You know well's Ah do Miss Pitty ain' never live by herseff
an' she been shakin' in her lil shoes ever since she come back frum
Macom.  She say fer me ter tell y'all plain as Ah knows how dat she
jes' kain unnerstan' y'all desertin' her in her hour of need."

"Now, hesh!" said Mammy tartly, for it sat ill upon her to hear
Tara referred to as an "ole farm."  Trust an ignorant city-bred
darky not to know the difference between a farm and a plantation.
"Ain' us got no hours of need?  Ain' us needin' Miss Scarlett an'
Miss Melly right hyah an' needin' dem bad?  Huccome Miss Pitty doan
ast her brudder fer 'sistance, does she need any?"

Uncle Peter gave her a withering look.

"Us ain' had nuthin' ter do wid Mist' Henry fer y'ars, an' us is
too ole ter start now."  He turned back to the girls, who were
trying to suppress their smiles.  "You young Misses ought ter tek
shame, leavin' po' Miss Pitty 'lone, wid half her frens daid an' de
other half in Macom, an' 'Lanta full of Yankee sojers an' trashy
free issue niggers."

The two girls had borne the castigation with straight faces as long
as they could, but the thought of Aunt Pitty sending Peter to scold
them and bring them back bodily to Atlanta was too much for their
control.  They burst into laughter and hung on each other's
shoulders for support.  Naturally, Pork and Dilcey and Mammy gave
vent to loud guffaws at hearing the detractor of their beloved Tara
set at naught.  Suellen and Carreen giggled and even Gerald's face
wore a vague smile.  Everyone laughed except Peter, who shifted
from one large splayed foot to the other in mounting indignation.

"Whut's wrong wid you, nigger?" inquired Mammy with a grin.  "Is
you gittin' too ole ter perteck yo' own Missus?"

Peter was outraged.

"Too ole!  Me too ole?  No, Ma'm!  Ah kin perteck Miss Pitty lak Ah
allus done.  Ain' Ah perteck her down ter Macom when us refugeed?
Ain' Ah perteck her w'en de Yankees come ter Macom an' she so
sceered she faintin' all de time?  An' ain' Ah 'quire disyere nag
ter bring her back ter 'Lanta an' perteck her an' her pa's silver
all de way?"  Peter drew himself to his full height as he
vindicated himself.  "Ah ain' talkin' about perteckin'.  Ah's
talkin' 'bout how it LOOK."

"How who look?"

"Ah'm talkin' 'bout how it look ter folks, seein' Miss Pitty livin'
'lone.  Folks talks scan'lous 'bout maiden ladies dat lives by
deyseff," continued Peter, and it was obvious to his listeners that
Pittypat, in his mind, was still a plump and charming miss of
sixteen who must be sheltered against evil tongues.  "An' Ah ain'
figgerin' on havin' folks criticize her.  No, ma'm . . .  An' Ah
ain' figgerin' on her takin' in no bo'ders, jes' fer comp'ny
needer.  Ah done tole her dat.  'Not w'ile you got yo' flesh an'
blood dat belongs wid you,' Ah says.  An' now her flesh an' blood
denyin' her.  Miss Pitty ain' nuthin' but a chile an'--"

At this, Scarlett and Melly whooped louder and sank down to the
steps.  Finally Melly wiped tears of mirth from her eyes.

"Poor Uncle Peter!  I'm sorry I laughed.  Really and truly.  There!
Do forgive me.  Miss Scarlett and I just can't come home now.
Maybe I'll come in September after the cotton is picked.  Did
Auntie send you all the way down here just to bring us back on that
bag of bones?"

At this question, Peter's jaw suddenly dropped and guilt and
consternation swept over his wrinkled black face.  His protruding
underlip retreated to normal as swiftly as a turtle withdraws its
head beneath its shell.

"Miss Melly.  Ah is gittin' ole, Ah spec', 'cause Ah clean fergit
fer de moment whut she sent me fer, an' it's important too.  Ah got
a letter fer you.  Miss Pitty wouldn' trust de mails or nobody but
me ter bring it an'--"

"A letter?  For me?  Who from?"

"Well'm, it's--Miss Pitty, she says ter me, 'You, Peter, you brek
it gen'ly ter Miss Melly,' an' Ah say--"

Melly rose from the steps, her hand at her heart.

"Ashley!  Ashley!  He's dead!"

"No'm!  No'm!" cried Peter, his voice rising to a shrill bawl, as
he fumbled in the breast pocket of his ragged coat.  "He's 'live!
Disyere a letter frum him.  He comin' home.  He--  Gawdlmighty!
Ketch her, Mammy!  Lemme--"

"Doan you tech her, you ole fool!" thundered Mammy, struggling to
keep Melanie's sagging body from falling to the ground.  "You pious
black ape!  Brek it gen'ly!  You, Poke, tek her feet.  Miss
Carreen, steady her haid.  Lessus lay her on de sofa in de parlor."

There was a tumult of sound as everyone but Scarlett swarmed about
the fainting Melanie, everyone crying out in alarm, scurrying into
the house for water and pillows, and in a moment Scarlett and Uncle
Peter were left standing alone on the walk.  She stood rooted,
unable to move from the position to which she had leaped when she
heard his words, staring at the old man who stood feebly waving a
letter.  His old black face was as pitiful as a child's under its
mother's disapproval, his dignity collapsed.

For a moment she could not speak or move, and though her mind
shouted:  "He isn't dead!  He's coming home!" the knowledge brought
neither joy nor excitement, only a stunned immobility.  Uncle
Peter's voice came as from a far distance, plaintive, placating.

"Mist' Willie Burr frum Macom whut is kin ter us, he brung it ter
Miss Pitty.  Mist' Willie he in de same jail house wid Mist'
Ashley.  Mist' Willie he got a hawse an' he got hyah soon.  But
Mist' Ashley he a-walkin' an'--"

Scarlett snatched the letter from his hand.  It was addressed to
Melly in Miss Pitty's writing but that did not make her hesitate a
moment.  She ripped it open and Miss Pitty's inclosed note fell to
the ground.  Within the envelope there was a piece of folded paper,
grimy from the dirty pocket in which it had been carried, creased
and ragged about the edges.  It bore the inscription in Ashley's
hand:  "Mrs. George Ashley Wilkes, Care Miss Sarah Jane Hamilton,
Atlanta, or Twelve Oaks, Jonesboro, Ga."

With fingers that shook, she opened it and read:

"Beloved, I am coming home to you--"

Tears began to stream down her face so that she could not read and
her heart swelled up until she felt she could not bear the joy of
it.  Clutching the letter to her, she raced up the porch steps and
down the hall, past the parlor where all the inhabitants of Tara
were getting in one another's way as they worked over the
unconscious Melanie, and into Ellen's office.  She shut the door
and locked it and flung herself down on the sagging old sofa
crying, laughing, kissing the letter.

"Beloved," she whispered, "I am coming home to you."



Common sense told them that unless Ashley developed wings, it would
be weeks or even months before he could travel from Illinois to
Georgia, but hearts nevertheless beat wildly whenever a soldier
turned into the avenue at Tara.  Each bearded scarecrow might be
Ashley.  And if it were not Ashley, perhaps the soldier would have
news of him or a letter from Aunt Pitty about him.  Black and
white, they rushed to the front porch every time they heard
footsteps.  The sight of a uniform was enough to bring everyone
flying from the woodpile, the pasture and the cotton patch.  For a
month after the letter came, work was almost at a standstill.  No
one wanted to be out of the house when he arrived.  Scarlett least
of all.  And she could not insist on the others attending to their
duties when she so neglected hers.

But when the weeks crawled by and Ashley did not come or any news
of him, Tara settled back into its old routine.  Longing hearts
could only stand so much of longing.  An uneasy fear crept into
Scarlett's mind that something had happened to him along the way.
Rock Island was so far away and he might have been weak or sick
when released from prison.  And he had no money and was tramping
through a country where Confederates were hated.  If only she knew
where he was, she would send money to him, send every penny she had
and let the family go hungry, so he could come home swiftly on the
train.

"Beloved, I am coming home to you."

In the first rush of joy when her eyes met those words, they had
meant only that Ashley was coming home to her.  Now, in the light
of cooler reason, it was Melanie to whom he was returning, Melanie
who went about the house these days singing with joy.  Occasionally,
Scarlett wondered bitterly why Melanie could not have died in
childbirth in Atlanta.  That would have made things perfect.  Then
she could have married Ashley after a decent interval and made
little Beau a good stepmother too.  When such thoughts came she did
not pray hastily to God, telling Him she did not mean it.  God did
not frighten her any more.

Soldiers came singly and in pairs and dozens and they were always
hungry.  Scarlett thought despairingly that a plague of locusts
would be more welcome.  She cursed again the old custom of
hospitality which had flowered in the era of plenty, the custom
which would not permit any traveler, great or humble, to go on his
journey without a night's lodging, food for himself and his horse
and the utmost courtesy the house could give.  She knew that era
had passed forever, but the rest of the household did not, nor did
the soldiers, and each soldier was welcomed as if he were a long-
awaited guest.

As the never-ending line went by, her heart hardened.  They were
eating the food meant for the mouths of Tara, vegetables over whose
long rows she had wearied her back, food she had driven endless
miles to buy.  Food was so hard to get and the money in the
Yankee's wallet would not last forever.  Only a few greenbacks and
the two gold pieces were left now.  Why should she feed this horde
of hungry men?  The war was over.  They would never again stand
between her and danger.  So, she gave orders to Pork that when
soldiers were in the house, the table should be set sparely.  This
order prevailed until she noticed that Melanie, who had never been
strong since Beau was born, was inducing Pork to put only dabs of
food on her plate and giving her share to the soldiers.

"You'll have to stop it, Melanie," she scolded.  "You're half sick
yourself and if you don't eat more, you'll be sick in bed and we'll
have to nurse you.  Let these men go hungry.  They can stand it.
They've stood it for four years and it won't hurt them to stand it
a little while longer."

Melanie turned to her and on her face was the first expression of
naked emotion Scarlett had ever seen in those serene eyes.

"Oh, Scarlett, don't scold me!  Let me do it.  You don't know how
it helps me.  Every time I give some poor man my share I think that
maybe, somewhere on the road up north, some woman is giving my
Ashley a share of her dinner and it's helping him to get home to
me!"

"My Ashley."

"Beloved, I am coming home to you."

Scarlett turned away, wordless.  After that, Melanie noticed there
was more food on the table when guests were present, even though
Scarlett might grudge them every mouthful.

When the soldiers were too ill to go on, and there were many such,
Scarlett put them to bed with none too good grace.  Each sick man
meant another mouth to feed.  Someone had to nurse him and that
meant one less worker at the business of fence building, hoeing,
weeding and plowing.  One boy, on whose face a blond fuzz had just
begun to sprout, was dumped on the front porch by a mounted soldier
bound for Fayetteville.  He had found him unconscious by the
roadside and had brought him, across his saddle, to Tara, the
nearest house.  The girls thought he must be one of the little
cadets who had been called out of military school when Sherman
approached Milledgeville but they never knew, for he died without
regaining consciousness and a search of his pockets yielded no
information.

A nice-looking boy, obviously a gentleman, and somewhere to the
south, some woman was watching the roads, wondering where he was
and when he was coming home, just as she and Melanie, with a wild
hope in their hearts, watched every bearded figure that came up
their walk.  They buried the cadet in the family burying ground,
next to the three little O'Hara boys, and Melanie cried sharply as
Pork filled in the grave, wondering in her heart if strangers were
doing this same thing to the tall body of Ashley.

Will Benteen was another soldier, like the nameless boy, who
arrived unconscious across the saddle of a comrade.  Will was
acutely ill with pneumonia and when the girls put him to bed, they
feared he would soon join the boy in the burying ground.

He had the sallow malarial face of the south Georgia Cracker, pale
pinkish hair and washed-out blue eyes which even in delirium were
patient and mild.  One of his legs was gone at the knee and to the
stump was fitted a roughly whittled wooden peg.  He was obviously a
Cracker, just as the boy they had buried so short a while ago was
obviously a planter's son.  Just how the girls knew this they could
not say.  Certainly Will was no dirtier, no more hairy, no more
lice infested than many fine gentlemen who came to Tara.  Certainly
the language he used in his delirium was no less grammatical than
that of the Tarleton twins.  But they knew instinctively, as they
knew thoroughbred horses from scrubs, that he was not of their
class.  But this knowledge did not keep them from laboring to save
him.

Emaciated from a year in a Yankee prison, exhausted by his long
tramp on his ill-fitting wooden peg, he had little strength to
combat pneumonia and for days he lay in the bed moaning, trying to
get up, fighting battles over again.  Never once did he call for
mother, wife, sister or sweetheart and this omission worried
Carreen.

"A man ought to have some folks," she said.  "And he sounds like he
didn't have a soul in the world."

For all his lankiness he was tough, and good nursing pulled him
through.  The day came when his pale blue eyes, perfectly cognizant
of his surroundings, fell upon Carreen sitting beside him, telling
her rosary beads, the morning sun shining through her fair hair.

"Then you warn't a dream, after all," he said, in his flat toneless
voice.  "I hope I ain't troubled you too much, Ma'm."

His convalescence was a long one and he lay quietly looking out of
the window at the magnolias and causing very little trouble to
anyone.  Carreen liked him because of his placid and unembarrassed
silences.  She would sit beside him through the long hot
afternoons, fanning him and saying nothing.

Carreen had very little to say these days as she moved, delicate
and wraithlike, about the tasks which were within her strength.
She prayed a good deal, for when Scarlett came into her room
without knocking, she always found her on her knees by her bed.
The sight never failed to annoy her, for Scarlett felt that the
time for prayer had passed.  If God had seen fit to punish them so,
then God could very well do without prayers.  Religion had always
been a bargaining process with Scarlett.  She promised God good
behavior in exchange for favors.  God had broken the bargain time
and again, to her way of thinking, and she felt that she owed Him
nothing at all now.  And whenever she found Carreen on her knees
when she should have been taking an afternoon nap or doing the
mending, she felt that Carreen was shirking her share of the
burdens.

She said as much to Will Benteen one afternoon when he was able to
sit up in a chair and was startled when he said in his flat voice:
"Let her be, Miss Scarlett.  It comforts her."

"Comforts her?"

"Yes, she's prayin' for your ma and him."

"Who is 'him'?"

His faded blue eyes looked at her from under sandy lashes without
surprise.  Nothing seemed to surprise or excite him.  Perhaps he
had seen too much of the unexpected ever to be startled again.
That Scarlett did not know what was in her sister's heart did not
seem odd to him.  He took it as naturally as he did the fact that
Carreen had found comfort in talking to him, a stranger.

"Her beau, that boy Brent something-or-other who was killed at
Gettysburg."

"Her beau?" said Scarlett shortly.  "Her beau, nothing!  He and his
brother were my beaux."

"Yes, so she told me.  Looks like most of the County was your
beaux.  But, all the same, he was her beau after you turned him
down, because when he come home on his last furlough they got
engaged.  She said he was the only boy she'd ever cared about and
so it kind of comforts her to pray for him."

"Well, fiddle-dee-dee!" said Scarlett, a very small dart of
jealousy entering her.

She looked curiously at this lanky man with his bony stooped
shoulders, his pinkish hair and calm unwavering eyes.  So he knew
things about her own family which she had not troubled to discover.
So that was why Carreen mooned about, praying all the time.  Well,
she'd get over it.  Lots of girls got over dead sweethearts, yes,
dead husbands, too.  She'd certainly gotten over Charles.  And she
knew one girl in Atlanta who had been widowed three times by the
war and was still able to take notice of men.  She said as much to
Will but he shook his head.

"Not Miss Carreen," he said with finality.

Will was pleasant to talk to because he had so little to say and
yet was so understanding a listener.  She told him about her
problems of weeding and hoeing and planting, of fattening the hogs
and breeding the cow, and he gave good advice for he had owned a
small farm in south Georgia and two negroes.  He knew his slaves
were free now and the farm gone to weeds and seedling pines.  His
sister, his only relative, had moved to Texas with her husband
years ago and he was alone in the world.  Yet, none of these things
seemed to bother him any more than the leg he had left in Virginia.

Yes, Will was a comfort to Scarlett after hard days when the
negroes muttered and Suellen nagged and cried and Gerald asked too
frequently where Ellen was.  She could tell Will anything.  She
even told him of killing the Yankee and glowed with pride when he
commented briefly:  "Good work!"

Eventually all the family found their way to Will's room to air
their troubles--even Mammy, who had at first been distant with him
because he was not quality and had owned only two slaves.

When he was able to totter about the house, he turned his hands to
weaving baskets of split oak and mending the furniture ruined by
the Yankees.  He was clever at whittling and Wade was constantly by
his side, for he whittled out toys for him, the only toys the
little boy had.  With Will in the house, everyone felt safe in
leaving Wade and the two babies while they went about their tasks,
for he could care for them as deftly as Mammy and only Melly
surpassed him at soothing the screaming black and white babies.

"You've been mighty good to me, Miss Scarlett," he said, "and me a
stranger and nothin' to you all.  I've caused you a heap of trouble
and worry and if it's all the same to you, I'm goin' to stay here
and help you all with the work till I've paid you back some for
your trouble.  I can't ever pay it all, 'cause there ain't no
payment a man can give for his life."

So he stayed and, gradually, unobtrusively, a large part of the
burden of Tara shifted from Scarlett's shoulders to the bony
shoulders of Will Benteen.



It was September and time to pick the cotton.  Will Benteen sat on
the front steps at Scarlett's feet in the pleasant sunshine of the
early autumn afternoon and his flat voice went on and on languidly
about the exorbitant costs of ginning the cotton at the new gin
near Fayetteville.  However, he had learned that day in
Fayetteville that he could cut this expense a fourth by lending the
horse and wagon for two weeks to the gin owner.  He had delayed
closing the bargain until he discussed it with Scarlett.

She looked at the lank figure leaning against the porch column,
chewing a straw.  Undoubtedly, as Mammy frequently declared, Will
was something the Lord had provided and Scarlett often wondered how
Tara could have lived through the last few months without him.  He
never had much to say, never displayed any energy, never seemed to
take much interest in anything that went on about him, but he knew
everything about everybody at Tara.  And he did things.  He did
them silently, patiently and competently.  Though he had only one
leg, he could work faster than Pork.  And he could get work out of
Pork, which was, to Scarlett, a marvelous thing.  When the cow had
the colic and the horse fell ill with a mysterious ailment which
threatened to remove him permanently from them, Will sat up nights
with them and saved them.  That he was a shrewd trader brought him
Scarlett's respect, for he could ride out in the mornings with a
bushel or two of apples, sweet potatoes and other vegetables and
return with seeds, lengths of cloth, flour and other necessities
which she knew she could never have acquired, good trader though
she was.

He had gradually slipped into the status of a member of the family
and slept on a cot in the little dressing room off Gerald's room.
He said nothing of leaving Tara, and Scarlett was careful not to
question him, fearful that he might leave them.  Sometimes, she
thought that if he were anybody and had any gumption he would go
home, even if he no longer had a home.  But even with this thought,
she would pray fervently that he would remain indefinitely.  It was
so convenient to have a man about the house.

She thought, too, that if Carreen had the sense of a mouse she
would see that Will cared for her.  Scarlett would have been
eternally grateful to Will, had he asked her for Carreen's hand.
Of course, before the war, Will would certainly not have been an
eligible suitor.  He was not of the planter class at all, though he
was not poor white.  He was just plain Cracker, a small farmer,
half-educated, prone to grammatical errors and ignorant of some of
the finer manners the O'Haras were accustomed to in gentlemen.  In
fact, Scarlett wondered if he could be called a gentleman at all
and decided that he couldn't.  Melanie hotly defended him, saying
that anyone who had Will's kind heart and thoughtfulness of others
was of gentle birth.  Scarlett knew that Ellen would have fainted
at the thought of a daughter of hers marrying such a man, but now
Scarlett had been by necessity forced too far away from Ellen's
teachings to let that worry her.  Men were scarce, girls had to
marry someone and Tara had to have a man.  But Carreen, deeper and
deeper immersed in her prayer book and every day losing more of her
touch with the world of realities, treated Will as gently as a
brother and took him as much for granted as she did Pork.

"If Carreen had any sense of gratitude to me for what I've done for
her, she'd marry him and not let him get away from here," Scarlett
thought indignantly.  "But no, she must spend her time mooning
about a silly boy who probably never gave her a serious thought."

So Will remained at Tara, for what reason she did not know and she
found his businesslike man-to-man attitude with her both pleasant
and helpful.  He was gravely deferential to the vague Gerald but it
was to Scarlett that he turned as the real head of the house.

She gave her approval to the plan of hiring out the horse even
though it meant the family would be without any means of
transportation temporarily.  Suellen would be especially grieved at
this.  Her greatest joy lay in going to Jonesboro or Fayetteville
with Will when he drove over on business.  Adorned in the assembled
best of the family, she called on old friends, heard all the gossip
of the County and felt herself again Miss O'Hara of Tara.  Suellen
never missed the opportunity to leave the plantation and give
herself airs among people who did not know she weeded the garden
and made beds.

Miss Fine Airs will just have to do without gadding for two weeks,
thought Scarlett, and we'll have to put up with her nagging and her
bawling.

Melanie joined them on the veranda, the baby in her arms, and
spreading an old blanket on the floor, set little Beau down to
crawl.  Since Ashley's letter Melanie had divided her time between
glowing, singing happiness and anxious longing.  But happy or
depressed, she was too thin, too white.  She did her share of the
work uncomplainingly but she was always ailing.  Old Dr. Fontaine
diagnosed her trouble as female complaint and concurred with Dr.
Meade in saying she should never have had Beau.  And he said
frankly that another baby would kill her.

"When I was over to Fayetteville today," said Will, "I found
somethin' right cute that I thought would interest you ladies and I
brought it home."  He fumbled in his back pants pocket and brought
out the wallet of calico, stiffened with bark, which Carreen had
made him.  From it, he drew a Confederate bill.

"If you think Confederate money is cute, Will, I certainly don't,"
said Scarlett shortly, for the very sight of Confederate money made
her mad.  "We've got three thousand dollars of it in Pa's trunk
this minute, and Mammy's after me to let her paste it over the
holes in the attic walls so the draft won't get her.  And I think
I'll do it.  Then it'll be good for something."

"'Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,'" said Melanie with a
sad smile.  "Don't do that, Scarlett.  Keep it for Wade.  He'll be
proud of it some day."

"Well, I don't know nothin' about imperious Caesar," said Will,
patiently, "but what I've got is in line with what you've just said
about Wade, Miss Melly.  It's a poem, pasted on the back of this
bill.  I know Miss Scarlett ain't much on poems but I thought this
might interest her."

He turned the bill over.  On its back was pasted a strip of coarse
brown wrapping paper, inscribed in pale homemade ink.  Will cleared
his throat and read slowly and with difficulty.

"The name is 'Lines on the Back of a Confederate Note,'" he said.


"Representing nothing on God's earth now
   And naught in the waters below it--
As the pledge of nation that's passed away
   Keep it, dear friend, and show it.

Show it to those who will lend an ear
   To the tale this trifle will tell
Of Liberty, born of patriots' dream,
   Of a storm-cradled nation that fell."


"Oh, how beautiful!  How touching!" cried Melanie.  "Scarlett, you
mustn't give the money to Mammy to paste in the attic.  It's more
than paper--just like this poem said:  'The pledge of a nation
that's passed away!'"

"Oh, Melly, don't be sentimental!  Paper is paper and we've got
little enough of it and I'm tired of hearing Mammy grumble about
the cracks in the attic.  I hope when Wade grows up I'll have
plenty of greenbacks to give him instead of Confederate trash."

Will, who had been enticing little Beau across the blanket with the
bill during this argument, looked up and, shading his eyes, glanced
down the driveway.

"More company," he said, squinting in the sun.  "Another soldier."

Scarlett followed his gaze and saw a familiar sight, a bearded man
coming slowly up the avenue under the cedars, a man clad in a
ragged mixture of blue and gray uniforms, head bowed tiredly, feet
dragging slowly.

"I thought we were about through with soldiers," she said.  "I hope
this one isn't very hungry."

"He'll be hungry," said Will briefly.

Melanie rose.

"I'd better tell Dilcey to set an extra plate," she said, "and warn
Mammy not to get the poor thing's clothes off his back too abruptly
and--"

She stopped so suddenly that Scarlett turned to look at her.
Melanie's thin hand was at her throat, clutching it as if it was
torn with pain, and Scarlett could see the veins beneath the white
skin throbbing swiftly.  Her face went whiter and her brown eyes
dilated enormously.

She's going to faint, thought Scarlett, leaping to her feet and
catching her arm.

But, in an instant, Melanie threw off her hand and was down the
steps.  Down the graveled path she flew, skimming lightly as a
bird, her faded skirts streaming behind her, her arms outstretched.
Then, Scarlett knew the truth, with the impact of a blow.  She
reeled back against an upright of the porch as the man lifted a
face covered with a dirty blond beard and stopped still, looking
toward the house as if he was too weary to take another step.  Her
heart leaped and stopped and then began racing, as Melly with
incoherent cries threw herself into the dirty soldier's arms and
his head bent down toward hers.  With rapture, Scarlett took two
running steps forward but was checked when Will's hand closed upon
her skirt.

"Don't spoil it," he said quietly.

"Turn me loose, you fool!  Turn me loose!  It's Ashley!"

He did not relax his grip.

"After all, he's HER husband, ain't he?" Will asked calmly and,
looking down at him in a confusion of joy and impotent fury,
Scarlett saw in the quiet depths of his eyes understanding and
pity.