CHAPTER XXXI


On a cold January afternoon in 1866, Scarlett sat in the office
writing a letter to Aunt Pitty, explaining in detail for the tenth
time why neither she, Melanie nor Ashley could come back to Atlanta
to live with her.  She wrote impatiently because she knew Aunt
Pitty would read no farther than the opening lines and then write
her again, wailing:  "But I'm afraid to live by myself!"

Her hands were chilled and she paused to rub them together and to
scuff her feet deeper into the strip of old quilting wrapped about
them.  The soles of her slippers were practically gone and were
reinforced with pieces of carpet.  The carpet kept her feet off the
floor but did little to keep them warm.  That morning Will had
taken the horse to Jonesboro to get him shod.  Scarlett thought
grimly that things were indeed at a pretty pass when horses had
shoes and people's feet were as bare as yard dogs'.

She picked up her quill to resume her writing but laid it down when
she heard Will coming in at the back door.  She heard the thump-
thump of his wooden leg in the hall outside the office and then he
stopped.  She waited for a moment for him to enter and when he made
no move she called to him.  He came in, his ears red from the cold,
his pinkish hair awry, and stood looking down at her, a faintly
humorous smile on his lips.

"Miss Scarlett," he questioned, "just how much cash money have you
got?"

"Are you going to try to marry me for my money, Will?" she asked
somewhat crossly.

"No, Ma'm.  But I just wanted to know."

She stared at him inquiringly.  Will didn't look serious, but then
he never looked serious.  However, she felt that something was
wrong.

"I've got ten dollars in gold," she said.  "The last of that
Yankee's money."

"Well, Ma'm, that won't be enough."

"Enough for what?"

"Enough for the taxes," he answered and, stumping over to the
fireplace, he leaned down and held his red hands to the blaze.

"Taxes?" she repeated.  "Name of God, Will!  We've already paid the
taxes."

"Yes'm.  But they say you didn't pay enough.  I heard about it
today over to Jonesboro."

"But, Will, I can't understand.  What do you mean?"

"Miss Scarlett, I sure hate to bother you with more trouble when
you've had your share but I've got to tell you.  They say you ought
to paid lots more taxes than you did.  They're runnin' the
assessment up on Tara sky high--higher than any in the County, I'll
be bound."

"But they can't make us pay more taxes when we've already paid them
once."

"Miss Scarlett, you don't never go to Jonesboro often and I'm glad
you don't.  It ain't no place for a lady these days.  But if you'd
been there much, you'd know there's a mighty rough bunch of
Scallawags and Republicans and Carpetbaggers been runnin' things
recently.  They'd make you mad enough to pop.  And then, too,
niggers pushin' white folks off the sidewalks and--"

"But what's that got to do with our taxes?"

"I'm gettin' to it, Miss Scarlett.  For some reason the rascals
have histed the taxes on Tara till you'd think it was a thousand-
bale place.  After I heard about it, I sorter oozed around the
barrooms pickin' up gossip and I found out that somebody wants to
buy in Tara cheap at the sheriff's sale, if you can't pay the extra
taxes.  And everybody knows pretty well that you can't pay them.  I
don't know yet who it is wants this place.  I couldn't find out.
But I think that pusillanimous feller, Hilton, that married Miss
Cathleen knows, because he laughed kind of nasty when I tried to
sound him out."

Will sat down on the sofa and rubbed the stump of his leg.  It
ached in cold weather and the wooden peg was neither well padded
nor comfortable.  Scarlett looked at him wildly.  His manner was so
casual when he was sounding the death knell of Tara.  Sold out at
the sheriff's sale?  Where would they all go?  And Tara belonging
to some one else!  No, that was unthinkable!

She had been so engrossed with the job of making Tara produce she
had paid little heed to what was going on in the world outside.
Now that she had Will and Ashley to attend to whatever business she
might have in Jonesboro and Fayetteville, she seldom left the
plantation.  And even as she had listened with deaf ears to her
father's war talk in the days before the war came, so she had paid
little heed to Will and Ashley's discussions around the table after
supper about the beginnings of Reconstruction.

Oh, of course, she knew about the Scallawags--Southerners who had
turned Republican very profitably--and the Carpetbaggers, those
Yankees who came South like buzzards after the surrender with all
their worldly possessions in one carpetbag.  And she had had a few
unpleasant experiences with the Freedmen's Bureau.  She had
gathered, also, that some of the free negroes were getting quite
insolent.  This last she could hardly believe, for she had never
seen an insolent negro in her life.

But there were many things which Will and Ashley had conspired to
keep from her.  The scourge of war had been followed by the worse
scourge of Reconstruction, but the two men had agreed not to
mention the more alarming details when they discussed the situation
at home.  And when Scarlett took the trouble to listen to them at
all, most of what they said went in one ear and out the other.

She had heard Ashley say that the South was being treated as a
conquered province and that vindictiveness was the dominant policy
of the conquerors.  But that was the kind of statement which meant
less than nothing at all to Scarlett.  Politics was men's business.
She had heard Will say it looked to him like the North just wasn't
aiming to let the South get on its feet again.  Well, thought
Scarlett, men always had to have something foolish to worry about.
As far as she was concerned, the Yankees hadn't whipped her once
and they wouldn't do it this time.  The thing to do was to work
like the devil and stop worrying about the Yankee government.
After all, the war was over.

Scarlett did not realize that all the rules of the game had been
changed and that honest labor could no longer earn its just reward.
Georgia was virtually under martial law now.  The Yankee soldiers
garrisoned throughout the section and the Freedmen's Bureau were in
complete command of everything and they were fixing the rules to
suit themselves.

This Bureau, organized by the Federal government to take care of
the idle and excited ex-slaves, was drawing them from the
plantations into the villages and cities by the thousands.  The
Bureau fed them while they loafed and poisoned their minds against
their former owners.  Gerald's old overseer, Jonas Wilkerson, was
in charge of the local Bureau, and his assistant was Hilton,
Cathleen Calvert's husband.  These two industriously spread the
rumor that the Southerners and Democrats were just waiting for a
good chance to put the negroes back into slavery and that the
negroes' only hope of escaping this fate was the protection given
them by the Bureau and the Republican party.

Wilkerson and Hilton furthermore told the negroes they were as good
as the whites in every way and soon white and negro marriages would
be permitted, soon the estates of their former owners would be
divided and every negro would be given forty acres and a mule for
his own.  They kept the negroes stirred up with tales of cruelty
perpetrated by the whites and, in a section long famed for the
affectionate relations between slaves and slave owners, hate and
suspicion began to grow.

The Bureau was backed up by the soldiers and the military had
issued many and conflicting orders governing the conduct of the
conquered.  It was easy to get arrested, even for snubbing the
officials of the Bureau.  Military orders had been promulgated
concerning the schools, sanitation, the kind of buttons one wore on
one's suit, the sale of commodities and nearly everything else.
Wilkerson and Hilton had the power to interfere in any trade
Scarlett might make and to fix their own prices on anything she
sold or swapped.

Fortunately Scarlett had come into contact with the two men very
little, for Will had persuaded her to let him handle the trading
while she managed the plantation.  In his mild-tempered way, Will
had straightened out several difficulties of this kind and said
nothing to her about them.  Will could get along with Carpetbaggers
and Yankees--if he had to.  But now a problem had arisen which was
too big for him to handle.  The extra tax assessment and the danger
of losing Tara were matters Scarlett had to know about--and right
away.

She looked at him with flashing eyes.

"Oh, damn the Yankees!" she cried.  "Isn't it enough that they've
licked us and beggared us without turning loose scoundrels on us?"

The war was over, peace had been declared, but the Yankees could
still rob her, they could still starve her, they could still drive
her from her house.  And fool that she was, she had thought through
weary months that if she could just hold out until spring,
everything would be all right.  This crushing news brought by Will,
coming on top of a year of back-breaking work and hope deferred,
was the last straw.

"Oh, Will, and I thought our troubles were all over when the war
ended!"

"No'm."  Will raised his lantern-jawed, country-looking face and
gave her a long steady look.  "Our troubles are just gettin'
started."

"How much extra taxes do they want us to pay?"

"Three hundred dollars."

She was struck dumb for a moment.  Three hundred dollars!  It might
just as well be three million dollars.

"Why," she floundered, "why--why, then we've got to raise three
hundred, somehow."

"Yes'm--and a rainbow and a moon or two."

"Oh, but Will!  They couldn't sell out Tara.  Why--"

His mild pale eyes showed more hate and bitterness than she thought
possible.

"Oh, couldn't they?  Well, they could and they will and they'll
like doin' it!  Miss Scarlett, the country's gone plumb to hell, if
you'll pardon me.  Those Carpetbaggers and Scallawags can vote and
most of us Democrats can't.  Can't no Democrat in this state vote
if he was on the tax books for more than two thousand dollars in
'sixty-five.  That lets out folks like your pa and Mr. Tarleton and
the McRaes and the Fontaine boys.  Can't nobody vote who was a
colonel and over in the war and, Miss Scarlett, I bet this state's
got more colonels than any state in the Confederacy.  And can't
nobody vote who held office under the Confederate government and
that lets out everybody from the notaries to the judges, and the
woods are full of folks like that.  Fact is, the way the Yankees
have framed up that amnesty oath, can't nobody who was somebody
before the war vote at all.  Not the smart folks nor the quality
folks nor the rich folks.

"Huh!  I could vote if I took their damned oath.  I didn't have any
money in 'sixty-five and I certainly warn't a colonel or nothin'
remarkable.  But I ain't goin' to take their oath.  Not by a dinged
sight!  If the Yankees had acted right, I'd have taken their oath
of allegiance but I ain't now.  I can be restored to the Union but
I can't be reconstructed into it.  I ain't goin' to take their oath
even if I don't never vote again--  But scum like that Hilton
feller, he can vote, and scoundrels like Jonas Wilkerson and pore
whites like the Slatterys and no-counts like the MacIntoshes, they
can vote.  And they're runnin' things now.  And if they want to
come down on you for extra taxes a dozen times, they can do it.
Just like a nigger can kill a white man and not get hung or--"  He
paused, embarrassed, and the memory of what had happened to a lone
white woman on an isolated farm near Lovejoy was in both their
minds. . . .  "Those niggers can do anything against us and the
Freedmen's Bureau and the soldiers will back them up with guns and
we can't vote or do nothin' about it."

"Vote!" she cried.  "Vote!  What on earth has voting got to do with
all this, Will?  It's taxes we're talking about. . . .  Will,
everybody knows what a good plantation Tara is.  We could mortgage
it for enough to pay the taxes, if we had to."

"Miss Scarlett, you ain't any fool but sometimes you talk like one.
Who's got any money to lend you on this property?  Who except the
Carpetbaggers who are tryin' to take Tara away from you?  Why,
everybody's got land.  Everybody's land pore.  You can't give away
land."

"I've got those diamond earbobs I got off that Yankee.  We could
sell them."

"Miss Scarlett, who 'round here has got money for earbobs?  Folks
ain't got money to buy side meat, let alone gewgaws.  If you've got
ten dollars in gold, I take oath that's more than most folks have
got."

They were silent again and Scarlett felt as if she were butting her
head against a stone wall.  There had been so many stone walls to
butt against this last year.

"What are we goin' to do, Miss Scarlett?"

"I don't know," she said dully and felt that she didn't care.  This
was one stone wall too many and she suddenly felt so tired that her
bones ached.  Why should she work and struggle and wear herself
out?  At the end of every struggle it seemed that defeat was
waiting to mock her.

"I don't know," she said.  "But don't let Pa know.  It might worry
him."

"I won't."

"Have you told anyone?"

"No, I came right to you."

Yes, she thought, everyone always came right to her with bad news
and she was tired of it.

"Where is Mr. Wilkes?  Perhaps he'll have some suggestion."

Will turned his mild gaze on her and she felt, as from the first
day when Ashley came home, that he knew everything.

"He's down in the orchard splittin' rails.  I heard his axe when I
was puttin' up the horse.  But he ain't got any money any more than
we have."

"If I want to talk to him about it, I can, can't I?" she snapped,
rising to her feet and kicking the fragment of quilting from her
ankles.

Will did not take offense but continued rubbing his hands before
the flame.  "Better get your shawl, Miss Scarlett.  It's raw
outside."

But she went without the shawl, for it was upstairs and her need to
see Ashley and lay her troubles before him was too urgent to wait.

How lucky for her if she could find him alone!  Never once since
his return had she had a private word with him.  Always the family
clustered about him, always Melanie was by his side, touching his
sleeve now and again to reassure herself he was really there.  The
sight of that happy possessive gesture had aroused in Scarlett all
the jealous animosity which had slumbered during the months when
she had thought Ashley probably dead.  Now she was determined to
see him alone.  This time no one was going to prevent her from
talking with him alone.



She went through the orchard under the bare boughs and the damp
weeds beneath them wet her feet.  She could hear the sound of the
axe ringing as Ashley split into rails the logs hauled from the
swamp.  Replacing the fences the Yankees had so blithely burned was
a long hard task.  Everything was a long hard task, she thought
wearily, and she was tired of it, tired and mad and sick of it all.
If only Ashley were her husband, instead of Melanie's, how sweet it
would be to go to him and lay her head upon his shoulder and cry
and shove her burdens onto him to work out as best he might.

She rounded a thicket of pomegranate trees which were shaking bare
limbs in the cold wind and saw him leaning on his axe, wiping his
forehead with the back of his hand.  He was wearing the remains of
his butternut trousers and one of Gerald's shirts, a shirt which in
better times went only to Court days and barbecues, a ruffled shirt
which was far too short for its present owner.  He had hung his
coat on a tree limb, for the work was hot, and he stood resting as
she came up to him.

At the sight of Ashley in rags, with an axe in his hand, her heart
went out in a surge of love and of fury at fate.  She could not
bear to see him in tatters, working, her debonaire immaculate
Ashley.  His hands were not made for work or his body for anything
but broadcloth and fine linen.  God intended him to sit in a great
house, talking with pleasant people, playing the piano and writing
things which sounded beautiful and made no sense whatsoever.

She could endure the sight of her own child in aprons made of
sacking and the girls in dingy old gingham, could bear it that Will
worked harder than any field hand, but not Ashley.  He was too fine
for all this, too infinitely dear to her.  She would rather split
logs herself than suffer while he did it.

"They say Abe Lincoln got his start splitting rails," he said as
she came up to him.  "Just think to what heights I may climb!"

She frowned.  He was always saying light things like this about
their hardships.  They were deadly serious matters to her and
sometimes she was almost irritated at his remarks.

Abruptly she told him Will's news, tersely and in short words,
feeling a sense of relief as she spoke.  Surely, he'd have
something helpful to offer.  He said nothing but, seeing her
shiver, he took his coat and placed it about her shoulders.

"Well," she said finally, "doesn't it occur to you that we'll have
to get the money somewhere?"

"Yes," he said, "but where?"

"I'm asking you," she replied, annoyed.  The sense of relief at
unburdening herself had disappeared.  Even if he couldn't help, why
didn't he say something comforting, even if it was only:  "Oh, I'm
so sorry."

He smiled.

"In all these months since I've been home I've only heard of one
person, Rhett Butler, who actually has money," he said.

Aunt Pittypat had written Melanie the week before that Rhett was
back in Atlanta with a carriage and two fine horses and pocketfuls
of greenbacks.  She had intimated, however, that he didn't come by
them honestly.  Aunt Pitty had a theory, largely shared by Atlanta,
that Rhett had managed to get away with the mythical millions of
the Confederate treasury.

"Don't let's talk about him," said Scarlett shortly.  "He's a skunk
if ever there was one.  What's to become of us all?"

Ashley put down the axe and looked away and his eyes seemed to be
journeying to some far-off country where she could not follow.

"I wonder," he said.  "I wonder not only what will become of us at
Tara but what will become of everybody in the South."

She felt like snapping out abruptly:  "To hell with everybody in
the South!  What about us?" but she remained silent because the
tired feeling was back on her more strongly than ever.  Ashley
wasn't being any help at all.

"In the end what will happen will be what has happened whenever a
civilization breaks up.  The people who have brains and courage
come through and the ones who haven't are winnowed out.  At least,
it has been interesting, if not comfortable, to witness a
Gotterdammerung."

"A what?"

"A dusk of the gods.  Unfortunately, we Southerners did think we
were gods."

"For Heaven's sake, Ashley Wilkes!  Don't stand there and talk
nonsense at me when it's us who are going to be winnowed out!"

Something of her exasperated weariness seemed to penetrate his
mind, calling it back from its wanderings, for he raised her hands
with tenderness and, turning them palm up, looked at the calluses.

"These are the most beautiful hands I know," he said and kissed
each palm lightly.  "They are beautiful because they are strong and
every callus is a medal, Scarlett, every blister an award for
bravery and unselfishness.  They've been roughened for all of us,
your father, the girls, Melanie, the baby, the negroes and for me.
My dear, I know what you are thinking.  You're thinking, 'Here
stands an impractical fool talking tommyrot about dead gods when
living people are in danger.'  Isn't that true?"

She nodded, wishing he would keep on holding her hands forever, but
he dropped them.

"And you came to me, hoping I could help you.  Well, I can't."

His eyes were bitter as he looked toward the axe and the pile of
logs.

"My home is gone and all the money that I so took for granted I
never realized I had it.  And I am fitted for nothing in this
world, for the world I belonged in has gone.  I can't help you,
Scarlett, except by learning with as good grace as possible to be a
clumsy farmer.  And that won't keep Tara for you.  Don't you think
I realize the bitterness of our situation, living here on your
charity--  Oh, yes, Scarlett, your charity.  I can never repay you
what you've done for me and for mine out of the kindness of your
heart.  I realize it more acutely every day.  And every day I see
more clearly how helpless I am to cope with what has come on us
all--  Every day my accursed shrinking from realities makes it
harder for me to face the new realities.  Do you know what I mean?"

She nodded.  She had no very clear idea what he meant but she clung
breathlessly on his words.  This was the first time he had ever
spoken to her of the things he was thinking when he seemed so
remote from her.  It excited her as if she were on the brink of a
discovery.

"It's a curse--this not wanting to look on naked realities.  Until
the war, life was never more real to me than a shadow show on a
curtain.  And I preferred it so.  I do not like the outlines of
things to be too sharp.  I like them gently blurred, a little
hazy."

He stopped and smiled faintly, shivering a little as the cold wind
went through his thin shirt.

"In other words, Scarlett, I am a coward."

His talk of shadow shows and hazy outlines conveyed no meaning to
her but his last words were in language she could understand.  She
knew they were untrue.  Cowardice was not in him.  Every line of
his slender body spoke of generations of brave and gallant men and
Scarlett knew his war record by heart.

"Why, that's not so!  Would a coward have climbed on the cannon at
Gettysburg and rallied the men?  Would the General himself have
written Melanie a letter about a coward?  And--"

"That's not courage," he said tiredly.  "Fighting is like
champagne.  It goes to the heads of cowards as quickly as of
heroes.  Any fool can be brave on a battle field when it's be brave
or else be killed.  I'm talking of something else.  And my kind of
cowardice is infinitely worse than if I had run the first time I
heard a cannon fired."

His words came slowly and with difficulty as if it hurt to speak
them and he seemed to stand off and look with a sad heart at what
he had said.  Had any other man spoken so, Scarlett would have
dismissed such protestations contemptuously as mock modesty and a
bid for praise.  But Ashley seemed to mean them and there was a
look in his eyes which eluded her--not fear, not apology, but the
bracing to a strain which was inevitable and overwhelming.  The
wintry wind swept her damp ankles and she shivered again but her
shiver was less from the wind than from the dread his words evoked
in her heart.

"But, Ashley, what are you afraid of?"

"Oh, nameless things.  Things which sound very silly when they are
put into words.  Mostly of having life suddenly become too real, of
being brought into personal, too personal, contact with some of the
simple facts of life.  It isn't that I mind splitting logs here in
the mud, but I do mind what it stands for.  I do mind, very much,
the loss of the beauty of the old life I loved.  Scarlett, before
the war, life was beautiful.  There was a glamor to it, a
perfection and a completeness and a symmetry to it like Grecian
art.  Maybe it wasn't so to everyone.  I know that now.  But to me,
living at Twelve Oaks, there was a real beauty to living.  I
belonged in that life.  I was a part of it.  And now it is gone and
I am out of place in this new life, and I am afraid.  Now, I know
that in the old days it was a shadow show I watched.  I avoided
everything which was not shadowy, people and situations which were
too real, too vital.  I resented their intrusion.  I tried to avoid
you too, Scarlett.  You were too full of living and too real and I
was cowardly enough to prefer shadows and dreams."

"But--but--Melly?"

"Melanie is the gentlest of dreams and a part of my dreaming.  And
if the war had not come I would have lived out my life, happily
buried at Twelve Oaks, contentedly watching life go by and never
being a part of it.  But when the war came, life as it really is
thrust itself against me.  The first time I went into action--it
was at Bull Run, you remember--I saw my boyhood friends blown to
bits and heard dying horses scream and learned the sickeningly
horrible feeling of seeing men crumple up and spit blood when I
shot them.  But those weren't the worst things about the war,
Scarlett.  The worst thing about the war was the people I had to
live with.

"I had sheltered myself from people all my life, I had carefully
selected my few friends.  But the war taught me I had created a
world of my own with dream people in it.  It taught me what people
really are, but it didn't teach me how to live with them.  And I'm
afraid I'll never learn.  Now, I know that in order to support my
wife and child, I will have to make my way among a world of people
with whom I have nothing in common.  You, Scarlett, are taking life
by the horns and twisting it to your will.  But where do I fit in
the world any more?  I tell you I am afraid."

While his low resonant voice went on, desolate, with a feeling she
could not understand, Scarlett clutched at words here and there,
trying to make sense of them.  But the words swooped from her hands
like wild birds.  Something was driving him, driving him with a
cruel goad, but she did not understand what it was.

"Scarlett, I don't know just when it was that the bleak realization
came over me that my own private shadow show was over.  Perhaps in
the first five minutes at Bull Run when I saw the first man I
killed drop to the ground.  But I knew it was over and I could no
longer be a spectator.  No, I suddenly found myself on the curtain,
an actor, posturing and making futile gestures.  My little inner
world was gone, invaded by people whose thoughts were not my
thoughts, whose actions were as alien as a Hottentot's.  They'd
tramped through my world with slimy feet and there was no place
left where I could take refuge when things became too bad to stand.
When I was in prison, I thought:  When the war is over, I can go
back to the old life and the old dreams and watch the shadow show
again.  But, Scarlett, there's no going back.  And this which is
facing all of us now is worse than war and worse than prison--and,
to me, worse than death. . . .  So, you see, Scarlett, I'm being
punished for being afraid."

"But, Ashley," she began, floundering in a quagmire of bewilderment,
"if you're afraid we'll starve, why--why--  Oh, Ashley, we'll manage
somehow!  I know we will!"

For a moment, his eyes came back to her, wide and crystal gray, and
there was admiration in them.  Then, suddenly, they were remote
again and she knew with a sinking heart that he had not been
thinking about starving.  They were always like two people talking
to each other in different languages.  But she loved him so much
that, when he withdrew as he had now done, it was like the warm sun
going down and leaving her in chilly twilight dews.  She wanted to
catch him by the shoulders and hug him to her, make him realize
that she was flesh and blood and not something he had read or
dreamed.  If she could only feel that sense of oneness with him for
which she had yearned since that day, so long ago, when he had come
home from Europe and stood on the steps of Tara and smiled up at
her.

"Starving's not pleasant," he said.  "I know for I've starved, but
I'm not afraid of that.  I am afraid of facing life without the
slow beauty of our old world that is gone."

Scarlett thought despairingly that Melanie would know what he
meant.  Melly and he were always talking such foolishness, poetry
and books and dreams and moonrays and star dust.  He was not
fearing the things she feared, not the gnawing of an empty stomach,
nor the keenness of the winter wind nor eviction from Tara.  He was
shrinking before some fear she had never known and could not
imagine.  For, in God's name, what was there to fear in this wreck
of a world but hunger and cold and the loss of home?

And she had thought that if she listened closely she would know the
answer to Ashley.

"Oh!" she said and the disappointment in her voice was that of a
child who opens a beautifully wrapped package to find it empty.  At
her tone, he smiled ruefully as though apologizing.

"Forgive me, Scarlett, for talking so.  I can't make you understand
because you don't know the meaning of fear.  You have the heart of
a lion and an utter lack of imagination and I envy you both of
those qualities.  You'll never mind facing realities and you'll
never want to escape from them as I do."

"Escape!"

It was as if that were the only understandable word he had spoken.
Ashley, like her, was tired of the struggle and he wanted to
escape.  Her breath came fast.

"Oh, Ashley," she cried, "you're wrong.  I do want to escape, too.
I am so very tired of it all!"

His eyebrows went up in disbelief and she laid a hand, feverish and
urgent, on his arm.

"Listen to me," she began swiftly, the words tumbling out one over
the other.  "I'm tired of it all, I tell you.  Bone tired and I'm
not going to stand it any longer.  I've struggled for food and for
money and I've weeded and hoed and picked cotton and I've even
plowed until I can't stand it another minute.  I tell you, Ashley,
the South is dead!  It's dead!  The Yankees and the free niggers
and the Carpetbaggers have got it and there's nothing left for us.
Ashley, let's run away!"

He peered at her sharply, lowering his head to look into her face,
now flaming with color.

"Yes, let's run away--leave them all!  I'm tired of working for the
folks.  Somebody will take care of them.  There's always somebody
who takes care of people who can't take care of themselves.  Oh,
Ashley, let's run away, you and I.  We could go to Mexico--they
want officers in the Mexican Army and we could be so happy there.
I'd work for you, Ashley.  I'd do anything for you.  You know you
don't love Melanie--"

He started to speak, a stricken look on his face, but she stemmed
his words with a torrent of her own.

"You told me you loved me better than her that day--oh, you
remember that day!  And I know you haven't changed!  I can tell you
haven't changed!  And you've just said she was nothing but a dream--
Oh, Ashley, let's go away!  I could make you so happy.  And
anyway," she added venomously, "Melanie can't--  Dr. Fontaine said
she couldn't ever have any more children and I could give you--"

His hands were on her shoulders so tightly that they hurt and she
stopped, breathless.

"We were to forget that day at Twelve Oaks."

"Do you think I could ever forget it?  Have you forgotten it?  Can
you honestly say you don't love me?"

He drew a deep breath and answered quickly.

"No.  I don't love you."

"That's a lie."

"Even if it is a lie," said Ashley and his voice was deadly quiet,
"it is not something which can be discussed."

"You mean--"

"Do you think I could go off and leave Melanie and the baby, even
if I hated them both?  Break Melanie's heart?  Leave them both to
the charity of friends?  Scarlett, are you mad?  Isn't there any
sense of loyalty in you?  You couldn't leave your father and the
girls.  They're your responsibility, just as Melanie and Beau are
mine, and whether you are tired or not, they are here and you've
got to bear them."

"I could leave them--I'm sick of them--tired of them--"

He leaned toward her and, for a moment, she thought with a catch at
her heart that he was going to take her in his arms.  But instead,
he patted her arm and spoke as one comforting a child.

"I know you're sick and tired.  That's why you are talking this
way.  You've carried the load of three men.  But I'm going to help
you--I won't always be so awkward--"

"There's only one way you can help me," she said dully, "and that's
to take me away from here and give us a new start somewhere, with a
chance for happiness.  There's nothing to keep us here."

"Nothing," he said quietly, "nothing--except honor."

She looked at him with baffled longing and saw, as if for the first
time, how the crescents of his lashes were the thick rich gold of
ripe wheat, how proudly his head sat upon his bared neck and how
the look of race and dignity persisted in his slim erect body, even
through its grotesque rags.  Her eyes met his, hers naked with
pleading, his remote as mountain lakes under gray skies.

She saw in them defeat of her wild dream, her mad desires.

Heartbreak and weariness sweeping over her, she dropped her head in
her hands and cried.  He had never seen her cry.  He had never
thought that women of her strong mettle had tears, and a flood of
tenderness and remorse swept him.  He came to her swiftly and in a
moment had her in his arms, cradling her comfortingly, pressing her
black head to his heart, whispering:  "Dear!  My brave dear--don't!
You mustn't cry!"

At his touch, he felt her change within his grip and there was
madness and magic in the slim body he held and a hot soft glow in
the green eyes which looked up at him.  Of a sudden, it was no
longer bleak winter.  For Ashley, spring was back again, that half-
forgotten balmy spring of green rustlings and murmurings, a spring
of ease and indolence, careless days when the desires of youth were
warm in his body.  The bitter years since then fell away and he saw
that the lips turned up to his were red and trembling and he kissed
her.

There was a curious low roaring sound in her ears as of sea shells
held against them and through the sound she dimly heard the swift
thudding of her heart.  Her body seemed to melt into his and, for a
timeless time, they stood fused together as his lips took hers
hungrily as if he could never have enough.

When he suddenly released her she felt that she could not stand
alone and gripped the fence for support.  She raised eyes blazing
with love and triumph to him.

"You do love me!  You do love me!  Say it--say it!"

His hands still rested on her shoulders and she felt them tremble
and loved their trembling.  She leaned toward him ardently but he
held her away from him, looking at her with eyes from which all
remoteness had fled, eyes tormented with struggle and despair.

"Don't!" he said.  "Don't!  If you do, I shall take you now, here."

She smiled a bright hot smile which was forgetful of time or place
or anything but the memory of his mouth on hers.

Suddenly he shook her, shook her until her black hair tumbled down
about her shoulders, shook her as if in a mad rage at her--and at
himself.

"We won't do this!" he said.  "I tell you we won't do it!"

It seemed as if her neck would snap if he shook her again.  She was
blinded by her hair and stunned by his action.  She wrenched
herself away and stared at him.  There were small beads of moisture
on his forehead and his fists were curled into claws as if in pain.
He looked at her directly, his gray eyes piercing.

"It's all my fault--none of yours and it will never happen again,
because I am going to take Melanie and the baby and go."

"Go?" she cried in anguish.  "Oh, no!"

"Yes, by God!  Do you think I'll stay here after this?  When this
might happen again--"

"But, Ashley, you can't go.  Why should you go?  You love me--"

"You want me to say it?  All right, I'll say it.  I love you."

He leaned over her with a sudden savagery which made her shrink
back against the fence.

"I love you, your courage and your stubbornness and your fire and
your utter ruthlessness.  How much do I love you?  So much that a
moment ago I would have outraged the hospitality of the house which
has sheltered me and my family, forgotten the best wife any man
ever had--enough to take you here in the mud like a--"

She struggled with a chaos of thoughts and there was a cold pain in
her heart as if an icicle had pierced it.  She said haltingly:  "If
you felt like that--and didn't take me--then you don't love me."

"I can never make you understand."

They fell silent and looked at each other.  Suddenly Scarlett
shivered and saw, as if coming back from a long journey, that it
was winter and the fields were bare and harsh with stubble and she
was very cold.  She saw too that the old aloof face of Ashley, the
one she knew so well, had come back and it was wintry too, and
harsh with hurt and remorse.

She would have turned and left him then, seeking the shelter of the
house to hide herself, but she was too tired to move.  Even speech
was a labor and a weariness.

"There is nothing left," she said at last.  "Nothing left for me.
Nothing to love.  Nothing to fight for.  You are gone and Tara is
going."

He looked at her for a long space and then, leaning, scooped up a
small wad of red clay from the ground.

"Yes, there is something left," he said, and the ghost of his old
smile came back, the smile which mocked himself as well as her.
"Something you love better than me, though you may not know it.
You've still got Tara."

He took her limp hand and pressed the damp clay into it and closed
her fingers about it.  There was no fever in his hands now, nor in
hers.  She looked at the red soil for a moment and it meant nothing
to her.  She looked at him and realized dimly that there was an
integrity of spirit in him which was not to be torn apart by her
passionate hands, nor by any hands.

If it killed him, he would never leave Melanie.  If he burned for
Scarlett until the end of his days, he would never take her and he
would fight to keep her at a distance.  She would never again get
through that armor.  The words, hospitality and loyalty and honor,
meant more to him than she did.

The clay was cold in her hand and she looked at it again.

"Yes," she said, "I've still got this."

At first, the words meant nothing and the clay was only red clay.
But unbidden came the thought of the sea of red dirt which
surrounded Tara and how very dear it was and how hard she had
fought to keep it--how hard she was going to have to fight if she
wished to keep it hereafter.  She looked at him again and wondered
where the hot flood of feeling had gone.  She could think but could
not feel, not about him nor Tara either, for she was drained of all
emotion.

"You need not go," she said clearly.  "I won't have you all starve,
simply because I've thrown myself at your head.  It will never
happen again."

She turned away and started back toward the house across the rough
fields, twisting her hair into a knot upon her neck.  Ashley
watched her go and saw her square her small thin shoulders as she
went.  And that gesture went to his heart, more than any words she
had spoken.



CHAPTER XXXII


She was still clutching the ball of red clay when she went up the
front steps.  She had carefully avoided the back entrance, for
Mammy's sharp eyes would certainly have seen that something was
greatly amiss.  Scarlett did not want to see Mammy or anyone else.
She did not feel that she could endure seeing anyone or talking to
anyone again.  She had no feeling of shame or disappointment or
bitterness now, only a weakness of the knees and a great emptiness
of heart.  She squeezed the clay so tightly it ran out from her
clenched fist and she said over and over, parrot-like:  "I've still
got this.  Yes, I've still got this."

There was nothing else she did have, nothing but this red land,
this land she had been willing to throw away like a torn
handkerchief only a few minutes before.  Now, it was dear to her
again and she wondered dully what madness had possessed her to hold
it so lightly.  Had Ashley yielded, she could have gone away with
him and left family and friends without a backward look but, even
in her emptiness, she knew it would have torn her heart to leave
these dear red hills and long washed gullies and gaunt black pines.
Her thoughts would have turned back to them hungrily until the day
she died.  Not even Ashley could have filled the empty spaces in
her heart where Tara had been uprooted.  How wise Ashley was and
how well he knew her!  He had only to press the damp earth into her
hand to bring her to her senses.

She was in the hall preparing to close the door when she heard the
sound of horse's hooves and turned to look down the driveway.  To
have visitors at this of all times was too much.  She'd hurry to
her room and plead a headache.

But when the carriage came nearer, her flight was checked by her
amazement.  It was a new carriage, shiny with varnish, and the
harness was new too, with bits of polished brass here and there.
Strangers, certainly.  No one she knew had the money for such a
grand new turn-out as this.

She stood in the doorway watching, the cold draft blowing her
skirts about her damp ankles.  Then the carriage stopped in front
of the house and Jonas Wilkerson alighted.  Scarlett was so
surprised at the sight of their former overseer driving so fine a
rig and in so splendid a greatcoat she could not for a moment
believe her eyes.  Will had told her he looked quite prosperous
since he got his new job with the Freedmen's Bureau.  Made a lot of
money, Will said, swindling the niggers or the government, one or
tuther, or confiscating folks' cotton and swearing it was
Confederate government cotton.  Certainly he never came by all that
money honestly in these hard times.

And here he was now, stepping out of an elegant carriage and
handing down a woman dressed within an inch of her life.  Scarlett
saw in a glance that the dress was bright in color to the point of
vulgarity but nevertheless her eyes went over the outfit hungrily.
It had been so long since she had even seen stylish new clothes.
Well!  So hoops aren't so wide this year, she thought, scanning the
red plaid gown.  And, as she took in the black velvet paletot, how
short jackets are!  And what a cunning hat!  Bonnets must be out of
style, for this hat was only an absurd flat red velvet affair,
perched on the top of the woman's head like a stiffened pancake.
The ribbons did not tie under the chin as bonnet ribbons tied but
in the back under the massive bunch of curls which fell from the
rear of the hat, curls which Scarlett could not help noticing did
not match the woman's hair in either color or texture.

As the woman stepped to the ground and looked toward the house,
Scarlett saw there was something familiar about the rabbity face,
caked with white powder.

"Why, it's Emmie Slattery!" she cried, so surprised she spoke the
words aloud.

"Yes'm, it's me," said Emmie, tossing her head with an ingratiating
smile and starting toward the steps.

Emmie Slattery!  The dirty tow-headed slut whose illegitimate baby
Ellen had baptized, Emmie who had given typhoid to Ellen and killed
her.  This overdressed, common, nasty piece of poor white trash was
coming up the steps of Tara, bridling and grinning as if she
belonged here.  Scarlett thought of Ellen and, in a rush, feeling
came back into the emptiness of her mind, a murderous rage so
strong it shook her like the ague.

"Get off those steps, you trashy wench!" she cried.  "Get off this
land!  Get out!"

Emmie's jaw sagged suddenly and she glanced at Jonas who came up
with lowering brows.  He made an effort at dignity, despite his
anger.

"You must not speak that way to my wife," he said.

"Wife?" said Scarlett and burst into a laugh that was cutting with
contempt.  "High time you made her your wife.  Who baptized your
other brats after you killed my mother?"

Emmie said "Oh!" and retreated hastily down the steps but Jonas
stopped her flight toward the carriage with a rough grip on her
arm.

"We came out here to pay a call--a friendly call," he snarled.
"And talk a little business with old friends--"

"Friends?"  Scarlett's voice was like a whiplash.  "When were we
ever friends with the like of you?  The Slatterys lived on our
charity and paid it back by killing Mother--and you--you--  Pa
discharged you about Emmie's brat and you know it.  Friends?  Get
off this place before I call Mr. Benteen and Mr. Wilkes."

Under the words, Emmie broke her husband's hold and fled for the
carriage, scrambling in with a flash of patent-leather boots with
bright-red tops and red tassels.

Now Jonas shook with a fury equal to Scarlett's and his sallow face
was as red as an angry turkey gobbler's.

"Still high and mighty, aren't you?  Well, I know all about you.  I
know you haven't got shoes for your feet.  I know your father's
turned idiot--"

"Get off this place!"

"Oh, you won't sing that way very long.  I know you're broke.  I
know you can't even pay your taxes.  I came out here to offer to
buy this place from you--to make you a right good offer.  Emmie had
a hankering to live here.  But, by God, I won't give you a cent
now!  You highflying, bog-trotting Irish will find out who's
running things around here when you get sold out for taxes.  And
I'll buy this place, lock, stock and barrel--furniture and all--and
I'll live in it."

So it was Jonas Wilkerson who wanted Tara--Jonas and Emmie, who in
some twisted way thought to even past slights by living in the home
where they had been slighted.  All her nerves hummed with hate, as
they had hummed that day when she shoved the pistol barrel into the
Yankee's bearded face and fired.  She wished she had that pistol
now.

"I'll tear this house down, stone by stone, and burn it and sow
every acre with salt before I see either of you put foot over this
threshold," she shouted.  "Get out, I tell you!  Get out!"

Jonas glared at her, started to say more and then walked toward the
carriage.  He climbed in beside his whimpering wife and turned the
horse.  As they drove off, Scarlett had the impulse to spit at
them.  She did spit.  She knew it was a common, childish gesture
but it made her feel better.  She wished she had done it while they
could see her.

Those damned nigger lovers daring to come here and taunt her about
her poverty!  That hound never intended offering her a price for
Tara.  He just used that as an excuse to come and flaunt himself
and Emmie in her face.  The dirty Scallawags, the lousy trashy poor
whites, boasting they would live at Tara!

Then, sudden terror struck her and her rage melted.  God's
nightgown!  They will come and live here!  There was nothing she
could do to keep them from buying Tara, nothing to keep them from
levying on every mirror and table and bed, on Ellen's shining
mahogany and rosewood, and every bit of it precious to her, scarred
though it was by the Yankee raiders.  And the Robillard silver too.
I won't let them do it, thought Scarlett vehemently.  No, not if
I've got to burn the place down!  Emmie Slattery will never set her
foot on a single bit of flooring Mother ever walked on!

She closed the door and leaned against it and she was very
frightened.  More frightened even than she had been that day when
Sherman's army was in the house.  That day the worst she could fear
was that Tara would be burned over her head.  But this was worse--
these low common creatures living in this house, bragging to their
low common friends how they had turned the proud O'Haras out.
Perhaps they'd even bring negroes here to dine and sleep.  Will had
told her Jonas made a great to-do about being equal with the
negroes, ate with them, visited in their houses, rode them around
with him in his carriage, put his arms around their shoulders.

When she thought of the possibility of this final insult to Tara,
her heart pounded so hard she could scarcely breathe.  She was
trying to get her mind on her problem, trying to figure some way
out, but each time she collected her thoughts, fresh gusts of rage
and fear shook her.  There must be some way out, there must be
someone somewhere who had money she could borrow.  Money couldn't
just dry up and blow away.  Somebody had to have money.  Then the
laughing words of Ashley came back to her:

"Only one person, Rhett Butler . . . who has money."

Rhett Butler.  She walked quickly into the parlor and shut the door
behind her.  The dim gloom of drawn blinds and winter twilight
closed about her.  No one would think of hunting for her here and
she wanted time to think, undisturbed.  The idea which had just
occurred to her was so simple she wondered why she had not thought
of it before.

"I'll get the money from Rhett.  I'll sell him the diamond earbobs.
Or I'll borrow the money from him and let him keep the earbobs till
I can pay him back."

For a moment, relief was so great she felt weak.  She would pay the
taxes and laugh in Jonas Wilkerson's face.  But close on this happy
thought came relentless knowledge.

"It's not only for this year that I'll need tax money.  There's
next year and all the years of my life.  If I pay up this time,
they'll raise the taxes higher next time till they drive me out.
If I make a good cotton crop, they'll tax it till I'll get nothing
for it or maybe confiscate it outright and say it's Confederate
cotton.  The Yankees and the scoundrels teamed up with them have
got me where they want me.  All my life, as long as I live, I'll be
afraid they'll get me somehow.  All my life I'll be scared and
scrambling for money and working myself to death, only to see my
work go for nothing and my cotton stolen. . . .  Just borrowing
three hundred dollars for the taxes will be only a stopgap.  What I
want is to get out of this fix, for good--so I can go to sleep at
night without worrying over what's going to happen to me tomorrow,
and next month, and next year."

Her mind ticked on steadily.  Coldly and logically an idea grew in
her brain.  She thought of Rhett, a flash of white teeth against
swarthy skin, sardonic black eyes caressing her.  She recalled the
hot night in Atlanta, close to the end of the siege, when he sat on
Aunt Pitty's porch half hidden in the summer darkness, and she felt
again the heat of his hand upon her arm as he said:  "I want you
more than I have ever wanted any woman--and I've waited longer for
you than I've ever waited for any woman."

"I'll marry him," she thought coolly.  "And then I'll never have to
bother about money again."

Oh, blessed thought, sweeter than hope of Heaven, never to worry
about money again, to know that Tara was safe, that the family was
fed and clothed, that she would never again have to bruise herself
against stone walls!

She felt very old.  The afternoon's events had drained her of all
feeling, first the startling news about the taxes, then Ashley and,
last, her murderous rage at Jonas Wilkerson.  No, there was no
emotion left in her.  If all her capacity to feel had not been
utterly exhausted, something in her would have protested against
the plan taking form in her mind, for she hated Rhett as she hated
no other person in all the world.  But she could not feel.  She
could only think and her thoughts were very practical.

"I said some terrible things to him that night when he deserted us
on the road, but I can make him forget them," she thought
contemptuously, still sure of her power to charm.  "Butter won't
melt in my mouth when I'm around him.  I'll make him think I always
loved him and was just upset and frightened that night.  Oh, men
are so conceited they'll believe anything that flatters them. . . .
I must never let him dream what straits we're in, not till I've got
him.  Oh, he mustn't know!  If he even suspected how poor we are,
he'd know it was his money I wanted and not himself.  After all,
there's no way he could know, for even Aunt Pitty doesn't know the
worst.  And after I've married him, he'll have to help us.  He
can't let his wife's people starve."

His wife.  Mrs. Rhett Butler.  Something of repulsion, buried deep
beneath her cold thinking, stirred faintly and then was stilled.
She remembered the embarrassing and disgusting events of her brief
honeymoon with Charles, his fumbling hands, his awkwardness, his
incomprehensible emotions--and Wade Hampton.

"I won't think about it now.  I'll bother about it after I've
married him. . . ."

After she had married him.  Memory rang a bell.  A chill went down
her spine.  She remembered again that night on Aunt Pitty's porch,
remembered how she asked him if he was proposing to her, remembered
how hatefully he had laughed and said:  "My dear, I'm not a
marrying man."

Suppose he was still not a marrying man.  Suppose despite all her
charms and wiles, he refused to marry her.  Suppose--oh, terrible
thought!--suppose he had completely forgotten about her and was
chasing after some other woman.

"I want you more than I have ever wanted any woman. . . ."

Scarlett's nails dug into her palms as she clenched her fists.  "If
he's forgotten me, I'll make him remember me.  I'll make him want
me again."

And, if he would not marry her but still wanted her, there was a
way to get the money.  After all, he had once asked her to be his
mistress.

In the dim grayness of the parlor she fought a quick decisive
battle with the three most binding ties of her soul--the memory of
Ellen, the teachings of her religion and her love for Ashley.  She
knew that what she had in her mind must be hideous to her mother
even in that warm far-off Heaven where she surely was.  She knew
that fornication was a mortal sin.  And she knew that, loving
Ashley as she did, her plan was doubly prostitution.

But all these things went down before the merciless coldness of her
mind and the goad of desperation.  Ellen was dead and perhaps death
gave an understanding of all things.  Religion forbade fornication
on pain of hell fire but if the Church thought she was going to
leave one stone unturned in saving Tara and saving the family from
starving--well, let the Church bother about that.  She wouldn't.
At least, not now.  And Ashley--Ashley didn't want her.  Yes, he
did want her.  The memory of his warm mouth on hers told her that.
But he would never take her away with him.  Strange that going away
with Ashley did not seem like a sin, but with Rhett--

In the dull twilight of the winter afternoon she came to the end of
the long road which had begun the night Atlanta fell.  She had set
her feet upon that road a spoiled, selfish and untried girl, full
of youth, warm of emotion, easily bewildered by life.  Now, at the
end of the road, there was nothing left of that girl.  Hunger and
hard labor, fear and constant strain, the terrors of war and the
terrors of Reconstruction had taken away all warmth and youth and
softness.  About the core of her being, a shell of hardness had
formed and, little by little, layer by layer, the shell had
thickened during the endless months.

But until this very day, two hopes had been left to sustain her.
She had hoped that the war being over, life would gradually resume
its old face.  She had hoped that Ashley's return would bring back
some meaning into life.  Now both hopes were gone.  The sight of
Jonas Wilkerson in the front walk of Tara had made her realize that
for her, for the whole South, the war would never end.  The
bitterest fighting, the most brutal retaliations, were just
beginning.  And Ashley was imprisoned forever by words which were
stronger than any jail.

Peace had failed her and Ashley had failed her, both in the same
day, and it was as if the last crevice in the shell had been
sealed, the final layer hardened.  She had become what Grandma
Fontaine had counseled against, a woman who had seen the worst and
so had nothing else to fear.  Not life nor Mother nor loss of love
nor public opinion.  Only hunger and her nightmare dream of hunger
could make her afraid.

A curious sense of lightness, of freedom, pervaded her now that she
had finally hardened her heart against all that bound her to the
old days and the old Scarlett.  She had made her decision and,
thank God, she wasn't afraid.  She had nothing to lose and her mind
was made up.

If she could only coax Rhett into marrying her, all would be
perfect.  But if she couldn't--well she'd get the money just the
same.  For a brief moment she wondered with impersonal curiosity
what would be expected of a mistress.  Would Rhett insist on
keeping her in Atlanta as people said he kept the Watling woman?
If he made her stay in Atlanta, he'd have to pay well--pay enough
to balance what her absence from Tara would be worth.  Scarlett was
very ignorant of the hidden side of men's lives and had no way of
knowing just what the arrangement might involve.  And she wondered
if she would have a baby.  That would be distinctly terrible.

"I won't think of that now.  I'll think of it later," and she
pushed the unwelcome idea into the back of her mind lest it shake
her resolution.  She'd tell the family tonight she was going to
Atlanta to borrow money, to try to mortgage the farm if necessary.
That would be all they needed to know until such an evil day when
they might find out differently.

With the thought of action, her head went up and her shoulders went
back.  This affair was not going to be easy, she knew.  Formerly,
it had been Rhett who asked for her favors and she who held the
power.  Now she was the beggar and a beggar in no position to
dictate terms.

"But I won't go to him like a beggar.  I'll go like a queen
granting favors.  He'll never know."

She walked to the long pier glass and looked at herself, her head
held high.  And she saw framed in the cracking gilt molding a
stranger.  It was as if she were really seeing herself for the
first time in a year.  She had glanced in the mirror every morning
to see that her face was clean and her hair tidy but she had always
been too pressed by other things to really see herself.  But this
stranger!  Surely this thin hollow-cheeked woman couldn't be
Scarlett O'Hara!  Scarlett O'Hara had a pretty, coquettish, high-
spirited face.  This face at which she stared was not pretty at all
and had none of the charm she remembered so well.  It was white and
strained and the black brows above slanting green eyes swooped up
startlingly against the white skin like frightened bird's wings.
There was a hard and hunted look about this face.

"I'm not pretty enough to get him!" she thought and desperation
came back to her.  "I'm thin--oh, I'm terribly thin!"

She patted her cheeks, felt frantically at her collar bones,
feeling them stand out through her basque.  And her breasts were so
small, almost as small as Melanie's.  She'd have to put ruffles in
her bosom to make them look larger and she had always had contempt
for girls who resorted to such subterfuges.  Ruffles!  That brought
up another thought.  Her clothes.  She looked down at her dress,
spreading its mended folds wide between her hands.  Rhett liked
women who were well dressed, fashionably dressed.  She remembered
with longing the flounced green dress she had worn when she first
came out of mourning, the dress she wore with the green plumed
bonnet he had brought her and she recalled the approving
compliments he had paid her.  She remembered, too, with hate
sharpened by envy the red plaid dress, the red-topped boots with
tassels and the pancake hat of Emmie Slattery.  They were gaudy but
they were new and fashionable and certainly they caught the eye.
And, oh, how she wanted to catch the eye!  Especially the eye of
Rhett Butler!  If he should see her in her old clothes, he'd know
everything was wrong at Tara.  And he must not know.

What a fool she had been to think she could go to Atlanta and have
him for the asking, she with her scrawny neck and hungry cat eyes
and raggedy dress!  If she hadn't been able to pry a proposal from
him at the height of her beauty, when she had her prettiest
clothes, how could she expect to get one now when she was ugly and
dressed tackily?  If Miss Pitty's story was true, he must have more
money than anyone in Atlanta and probably had his pick of all the
pretty ladies, good and bad.  Well, she thought grimly, I've got
something that most pretty ladies haven't got--and that's a mind
that's made up.  And if I had just one nice dress--

There wasn't a nice dress in Tara or a dress which hadn't been
turned twice and mended.

"That's that," she thought, disconsolately looking down at the
floor.  She saw Ellen's moss-green velvet carpet, now worn and
scuffed and torn and spotted from the numberless men who had slept
upon it, and the sight depressed her more, for it made her realize
that Tara was just as ragged as she.  The whole darkening room
depressed her and, going to the window, she raised the sash,
unlatched the shutters and let the last light of the wintry sunset
into the room.  She closed the window and leaned her head against
the velvet curtains and looked out across the bleak pasture toward
the dark cedars of the burying ground.

The moss-green velvet curtains felt prickly and soft beneath her
cheek and she rubbed her face against them gratefully, like a cat.
And then suddenly she looked at them.

A minute later, she was dragging a heavy marble-topped table across
the floor.  Its rusty castors screeching in protest.  She rolled
the table under the window, gathered up her skirts, climbed on it
and tiptoed to reach the heavy curtain pole.  It was almost out of
her reach and she jerked at it so impatiently the nails came out of
the wood, and the curtains, pole and all, fell to the floor with a
clatter.

As if by magic, the door of the parlor opened and the wide black
face of Mammy appeared, ardent curiosity and deepest suspicion
evident in every wrinkle.  She looked disapprovingly at Scarlett,
poised on the table top, her skirts above her knees, ready to leap
to the floor.  There was a look of excitement and triumph on her
face which brought sudden distrust to Mammy.

"Whut you up to wid Miss Ellen's po'teers?" she demanded.

"What are you up to listening outside doors?" asked Scarlett,
leaping nimbly to the floor and gathering up a length of the heavy
dusty velvet.

"Dat ain' needer hyah no dar," countered Mammy, girding herself for
combat.  "You ain' got no bizness wid Miss Ellen's po'teers,
juckin' de poles plum outer de wood, an' drappin' dem on de flo' in
de dust.  Miss Ellen set gret sto' by dem po'teers an' Ah ain'
'tendin' ter have you muss dem up dat way."

Scarlett turned green eyes on Mammy, eyes which were feverishly
gay, eyes which looked like the bad little girl of the good old
days Mammy sighed about.

"Scoot up to the attic and get my box of dress patterns, Mammy,"
she cried, giving her a slight shove.  "I'm going to have a new
dress."

Mammy was torn between indignation at the very idea of her two
hundred pounds scooting anywhere, much less to the attic, and the
dawning of a horrid suspicion.  Quickly she snatched the curtain
lengths from Scarlett, holding them against her monumental, sagging
breasts as if they were holy relics.

"Not outer Miss Ellen's po'teers is you gwine have a new dress, ef
dat's whut you figgerin' on.  Not w'ile Ah got breaf in mah body."

For a moment the expression Mammy was wont to describe to herself
as "bullheaded" flitted over her young mistress' face and then it
passed into a smile, so difficult for Mammy to resist.  But it did
not fool the old woman.  She knew Miss Scarlett was employing that
smile merely to get around her and in this matter she was
determined not to be gotten around.

"Mammy, don't be mean.  I'm going to Atlanta to borrow some money
and I've got to have a new dress."

"You doan need no new dress.  Ain' no other ladies got new dresses.
Dey weahs dey ole ones an' dey weahs dem proudfully.  Ain' no
reason why Miss Ellen's chile kain weah rags ef she wants ter, an'
eve'ybody respec' her lak she wo' silk."

The bullheaded expression began to creep back.  Lordy, 'twus right
funny how de older Miss Scarlett git de mo' she look lak Mist'
Gerald and de less lak Miss Ellen!

"Now, Mammy you know Aunt Pitty wrote us that Miss Fanny Elsing is
getting married this Saturday, and of course I'll go to the
wedding.  And I'll need a new dress to wear."

"De dress you got on'll be jes' as nice as Miss Fanny's weddin'
dress.  Miss Pitty done wrote dat de Elsings mighty po'."

"But I've got to have a new dress!  Mammy, you don't know how we
need money.  The taxes--"

"Yas'm, Ah knows all 'bout de taxes but--"

"You do?"

"Well'm, Gawd give me ears, din' he, an' ter hear wid?  Specially
w'en Mist' Will doan never tek trouble ter close de do'."

Was there nothing Mammy did not overhear?  Scarlett wondered how
that ponderous body which shook the floors could move with such
savage stealth when its owner wished to eavesdrop.

"Well, if you heard all that, I suppose you heard Jonas Wilkerson
and that Emmie--"

"Yas'm," said Mammy with smoldering eyes.

"Well, don't be a mule, Mammy.  Don't you see I've got to go to
Atlanta and get money for the taxes?  I've got to get some money.
I've got to do it!"  She hammered one small fist into the other.
"Name of God, Mammy, they'll turn us all out into the road and then
where'll we go?  Are you going to argue with me about a little
matter of Mother's curtains when that trash Emmie Slattery who
killed Mother is fixing to move into this house and sleep in the
bed Mother slept in?"

Mammy shifted from one foot to another like a restive elephant.
She had a dim feeling that she was being got around.

"No'm, Ah ain' wantin' ter see trash in Miss Ellen's house or us
all in de road but--"  She fixed Scarlett with a suddenly accusing
eye:  "Who is you fixin' ter git money frum dat you needs a new
dress?"

"That," said Scarlett, taken aback, "is my own business."

Mammy looked at her piercingly, just as she had done when Scarlett
was small and had tried unsuccessfully to palm off plausible
excuses for misdeeds.  She seemed to be reading her mind and
Scarlett dropped her eyes unwillingly, the first feeling of guilt
at her intended conduct creeping over her.

"So you needs a spang new pretty dress ter borry money wid.  Dat
doan lissen jes' right ter me.  An' you ain' sayin' whar de money
ter come frum."

"I'm not saying anything," said Scarlett indignantly.  "It's my own
business.  Are you going to give me that curtain and help me make
the dress?"

"Yas'm," said Mammy softly, capitulating with a suddenness which
aroused all the suspicion in Scarlett's mind.  "Ah gwine he'p you
mek it an' Ah specs we mout git a petticoat outer de satin linin'
of de po'teers an' trim a pa'r pantalets wid de lace cuttins."

She handed the velvet curtain back to Scarlett and a sly smile
spread over her face.

"Miss Melly gwine ter 'Lanta wid you, Miss Scarlett?"

"No," said Scarlett sharply, beginning to realize what was coming.
"I'm going by myself."

"Dat's whut you thinks," said Mammy firmly, "but Ah is gwine wid
you an' dat new dress.  Yas, Ma'm, eve'y step of de way."

For an instant Scarlett envisaged her trip to Atlanta and her
conversation with Rhett with Mammy glowering chaperonage like a
large black Cerberus in the background.  She smiled again and put a
hand on Mammy's arm.

"Mammy darling, you're sweet to want to go with me and help me, but
how on earth would the folks here get on without you?  You know you
just about run Tara."

"Huh!" said Mammy.  "Doan do no good ter sweet talk me, Miss
Scarlett.  Ah been knowin' you sence Ah put de fust pa'r of diapers
on you.  Ah's said Ah's gwine ter 'Lanta wid you an' gwine Ah is.
Miss Ellen be tuhnin' in her grabe at you gwine up dar by yo'seff
wid dat town full up wid Yankees an' free niggers an' sech like."

"But I'll be at Aunt Pittypat's," Scarlett offered frantically.

"Miss Pittypat a fine woman an' she think she see eve'ything but
she doan," said Mammy, and turning with the majestic air of having
closed the interview, she went into the hall.  The boards trembled
as she called:

"Prissy, child!  Fly up de stairs an' fotch Miss Scarlett's pattun
box frum de attic an' try an' fine de scissors without takin' all
night 'bout it."

"This is a fine mess," thought Scarlett dejectedly.  "I'd as soon
have a bloodhound after me."

After supper had been cleared away, Scarlett and Mammy spread
patterns on the dining-room table while Suellen and Carreen busily
ripped satin linings from curtains and Melanie brushed the velvet
with a clean hairbrush to remove the dust.  Gerald, Will and Ashley
sat about the room smoking, smiling at the feminine tumult.  A
feeling of pleasurable excitement which seemed to emanate from
Scarlett was on them all, an excitement they could not understand.
There was color in Scarlett's face and a bright hard glitter in her
eyes and she laughed a good deal.  Her laughter pleased them all,
for it had been months since they had heard her really laugh.
Especially did it please Gerald.  His eyes were less vague than
usual as they followed her swishing figure about the room and he
patted her approvingly whenever she was within reach.  The girls
were as excited as if preparing for a ball and they ripped and cut
and basted as if making a ball dress of their own.

Scarlett was going to Atlanta to borrow money or to mortgage Tara
if necessary.  But what was a mortgage, after all?  Scarlett said
they could easily pay it off out of next year's cotton and have
money left over, and she said it with such finality they did not
think to question.  And when they asked who was going to lend the
money she said:  "Layovers catch meddlers," so archly they all
laughed and teased her about her millionaire friend.

"It must be Captain Rhett Butler," said Melanie slyly and they
exploded with mirth at this absurdity, knowing how Scarlett hated
him and never failed to refer to him as "that skunk, Rhett Butler."

But Scarlett did not laugh at this and Ashley, who had laughed,
stopped abruptly as he saw Mammy shoot a quick, guarded glance at
Scarlett.

Suellen, moved to generosity by the party spirit of the occasion,
produced her Irish-lace collar, somewhat worn but still pretty, and
Carreen insisted that Scarlett wear her slippers to Atlanta, for
they were in better condition than any others at Tara.  Melanie
begged Mammy to leave her enough velvet scraps to recover the frame
of her battered bonnet and brought shouts of laughter when she said
the old rooster was going to part with his gorgeous bronze and
green-black tail feathers unless he took to the swamp immediately.

Scarlett, watching the flying fingers, heard the laughter and
looked at them all with concealed bitterness and contempt.

"They haven't an idea what is really happening to me or to
themselves or to the South.  They still think, in spite of
everything, that nothing really dreadful can happen to any of them
because they are who they are, O'Haras, Wilkeses, Hamiltons.  Even
the darkies feel that way.  Oh, they're all fools!  They'll never
realize!  They'll go right on thinking and living as they always
have, and nothing will change them.  Melly can dress in rags and
pick cotton and even help me murder a man but it doesn't change
her.  She's still the shy well-bred Mrs. Wilkes, the perfect lady!
And Ashley can see death and war and be wounded and lie in jail and
come home to less than nothing and still be the same gentleman he
was when he had all Twelve Oaks behind him.  Will is different.  He
knows how things really are but then Will never had anything much
to lose.  And as for Suellen and Carreen--they think all this is
just a temporary matter.  They don't change to meet changed
conditions because they think it'll all be over soon.  They think
God is going to work a miracle especially for their benefit.  But
He won't.  The only miracle that's going to be worked around here
is the one I'm going to work on Rhett Butler. . . .  They won't
change.  Maybe they can't change.  I'm the only one who's changed--
and I wouldn't have changed if I could have helped it."

Mammy finally turned the men out of the dining room and closed the
door, so the fitting could begin.  Pork helped Gerald upstairs to
bed and Ashley and Will were left alone in the lamplight in the
front hall.  They were silent for a while and Will chewed his
tobacco like a placid ruminant animal.  But his mild face was far
from placid.

"This goin' to Atlanta," he said at last in a slow voice, "I don't
like it.  Not one bit."

Ashley looked at Will quickly and then looked away, saying nothing
but wondering if Will had the same awful suspicion which was
haunting him.  But that was impossible.  Will didn't know what had
taken place in the orchard that afternoon and how it had driven
Scarlett to desperation.  Will couldn't have noticed Mammy's face
when Rhett Butler's name was mentioned and, besides, Will didn't
know about Rhett's money or his foul reputation.  At least, Ashley
did not think he could know these things, but since coming back to
Tara he had realized that Will, like Mammy, seemed to know things
without being told, to sense them before they happened.  There was
something ominous in the air, exactly what Ashley did not know, but
he was powerless to save Scarlett from it.  She had not met his
eyes once that evening and the hard bright gaiety with which she
had treated him was frightening.  The suspicions which tore at him
were too terrible to be put into words.  He did not have the right
to insult her by asking her if they were true.  He clenched his
fists.  He had no rights at all where she was concerned; this
afternoon he had forfeited them all, forever.  He could not help
her.  No one could help her.  But when he thought of Mammy and the
look of grim determination she wore as she cut into the velvet
curtains, he was cheered a little.  Mammy would take care of
Scarlett whether Scarlett wished it or not.

"I have caused all this," he thought despairingly.  "I have driven
her to this."

He remembered the way she had squared her shoulders when she turned
away from him that afternoon, remembered the stubborn lift of her
head.  His heart went out to her, torn with his own helplessness,
wrenched with admiration.  He knew she had no such word in her
vocabulary as gallantry, knew she would have stared blankly if he
had told her she was the most gallant soul he had ever known.  He
knew she would not understand how many truly fine things he
ascribed to her when he thought of her as gallant.  He knew that
she took life as it came, opposed her tough-fibered mind to
whatever obstacles there might be, fought on with a determination
that would not recognize defeat, and kept on fighting even when she
saw defeat was inevitable.

But, for four years, he had seen others who had refused to
recognize defeat, men who rode gaily into sure disaster because
they were gallant.  And they had been defeated, just the same.

He thought as he stared at Will in the shadowy hall that he had
never known such gallantry as the gallantry of Scarlett O'Hara
going forth to conquer the world in her mother's velvet curtains
and the tail feathers of a rooster.



CHAPTER XXXIII


A cold wind was blowing stiffly and the scudding clouds overhead
were the deep gray of slate when Scarlett and Mammy stepped from
the train in Atlanta the next afternoon.  The depot had not been
rebuilt since the burning of the city and they alighted amid
cinders and mud a few yards above the blackened ruins which marked
the site.  Habit strong upon her, Scarlett looked about for Uncle
Peter and Pitty's carriage, for she had always been met by them
when returning from Tara to Atlanta during the war years.  Then she
caught herself with a sniff at her own absent-mindedness.
Naturally, Peter wasn't there for she had given Aunt Pitty no
warning of her coming and, moreover, she remembered that one of the
old lady's letters had dealt tearfully with the death of the old
nag Peter had "'quired" in Macon to bring her back to Atlanta after
the surrender.

She looked about the rutted and cut-up space around the depot for
the equipage of some old friend or acquaintance who might drive
them to Aunt Pitty's house but she recognized no one, black or
white.  Probably none of her old friends owned carriages now, if
what Pitty had written them was true.  Times were so hard it was
difficult to feed and lodge humans, much less animals.  Most of
Pitty's friends, like herself, were afoot these days.

There were a few wagons loading at the freight cars and several
mud-splashed buggies with rough-looking strangers at the reins but
only two carriages.  One was a closed carriage, the other open and
occupied by a well-dressed woman and a Yankee officer.  Scarlett
drew in her breath sharply at the sight of the uniform.  Although
Pitty had written that Atlanta was garrisoned and the streets full
of soldiers, the first sight of the bluecoat startled and
frightened her.  It was hard to remember that the war was over and
that this man would not pursue her, rob her and insult her.

The comparative emptiness around the train took her mind back to
that morning in 1862 when she had come to Atlanta as a young widow,
swathed in crepe and wild with boredom.  She recalled how crowded
this space had been with wagons and carriages and ambulances and
how noisy with drivers swearing and yelling and people calling
greetings to friends.  She sighed for the light-hearted excitement
of the war days and sighed again at the thought of walking all the
way to Aunt Pitty's house.  But she was hopeful that once on
Peachtree Street, she might meet someone she knew who would give
them a ride.

As she stood looking about her a saddle-colored negro of middle age
drove the closed carriage toward her and, leaning from the box,
questioned:  "Cah'ige, lady?  Two bits fer any whar in 'Lanta."

Mammy threw him an annihilating glance.

"A hired hack!" she rumbled.  "Nigger, does you know who we is?"

Mammy was a country negro but she had not always been a country
negro and she knew that no chaste woman ever rode in a hired
conveyance--especially a closed carriage--without the escort of
some male member of her family.  Even the presence of a negro maid
would not satisfy the conventions.  She gave Scarlett a glare as
she saw her look longingly at the hack.

"Come 'way frum dar, Miss Scarlett!  A hired hack an' a free issue
nigger!  Well, dat's a good combination."

"Ah ain' no free issue nigger," declared the driver with heat.  "Ah
b'longs ter Ole Miss Talbot an' disyere her cah'ige an' Ah drives
it ter mek money fer us."

"Whut Miss Talbot is dat?"

"Miss Suzannah Talbot of Milledgeville.  Us done move up hyah affer
Old Marse wuz kilt."

"Does you know her, Miss Scarlett?"

"No," said Scarlett, regretfully.  "I know so few Milledgeville
folks."

"Den us'll walk," said Mammy sternly.  "Drive on, nigger."

She picked up the carpetbag which held Scarlett's new velvet frock
and bonnet and nightgown and tucked the neat bandanna bundle that
contained her own belongings under her arm and shepherded Scarlett
across the wet expanse of cinders.  Scarlett did not argue the
matter, much as she preferred to ride, for she wished no
disagreement with Mammy.  Ever since yesterday afternoon when Mammy
had caught her with the velvet curtains, there had been an alert
suspicious look in her eyes which Scarlett did not like.  It was
going to be difficult to escape from her chaperonage and she did
not intend to rouse Mammy's fighting blood before it was absolutely
necessary.

As they walked along the narrow sidewalk toward Peachtree, Scarlett
was dismayed and sorrowful, for Atlanta looked so devastated and
different from what she remembered.  They passed beside what had
been the Atlanta Hotel where Rhett and Uncle Henry had lived and of
that elegant hostelry there remained only a shell, a part of the
blackened walls.  The warehouses which had bordered the train
tracks for a quarter of a mile and held tons of military supplies
had not been rebuilt and their rectangular foundations looked
dreary under the dark sky.  Without the wall of buildings on either
side and with the car shed gone, the railroad tracks seemed bare
and exposed.  Somewhere amid these ruins, undistinguishable from
the others, lay what remained of her own warehouse on the property
Charles had left her.  Uncle Henry had paid last year's taxes on it
for her.  She'd have to repay that money some time.  That was
something else to worry about.

As they turned the corner into Peachtree Street and she looked
toward Five Points, she cried out with shock.  Despite all Frank
had told her about the town burning to the ground, she had never
really visualized complete destruction.  In her mind the town she
loved so well still stood full of close-packed buildings and fine
houses.  But this Peachtree Street she was looking upon was so
denuded of landmarks it was as unfamiliar as if she had never seen
it before.  This muddy street down which she had driven a thousand
times during the war, along which she had fled with ducked head and
fear-quickened legs when shells burst over her during the siege,
this street she had last seen in the heat and hurry and anguish of
the day of the retreat, was so strange looking she felt like
crying.

Though many new buildings had sprung up in the year since Sherman
marched out of the burning town and the Confederates returned,
there were still wide vacant lots around Five Points where heaps of
smudged broken bricks lay amid a jumble of rubbish, dead weeds and
broom-sedge.  There were the remains of a few buildings she
remembered, roofless brick walls through which the dull daylight
shone, glassless windows gaping, chimneys towering lonesomely.
Here and there her eyes gladly picked out a familiar store which
had partly survived shell and fire and had been repaired, the fresh
red of new brick glaring bright against the smut of the old walls.
On new store fronts and new office windows she saw the welcome
names of men she knew but more often the names were unfamiliar,
especially the dozens of shingles of strange doctors and lawyers
and cotton merchants.  Once she had known practically everyone in
Atlanta and the sight of so many strange names depressed her.  But
she was cheered by the sight of new buildings going up all along
the street.

There were dozens of them and several were three stories high!
Everywhere building was going on, for as she looked down the
street, trying to adjust her mind to the new Atlanta, she heard the
blithe sound of hammers and saws, noticed scaffoldings rising and
saw men climbing ladders with hods of bricks on their shoulders.
She looked down the street she loved so well and her eyes misted a
little.

"They burned you," she thought, "and they laid you flat.  But they
didn't lick you.  They couldn't lick you.  You'll grow back just as
big and sassy as you used to be!"

As she walked along Peachtree, followed by the waddling Mammy, she
found the sidewalks just as crowded as they were at the height of
the war and there was the same air of rush and bustle about the
resurrecting town which had made her blood sing when she came here,
so long ago, on her first visit to Aunt Pitty.  There seemed to be
just as many vehicles wallowing in the mud holes as there had been
then, except that there were no Confederate ambulances, and just as
many horses and mules tethered to hitching racks in front of the
wooden awnings of the stores.  Though the sidewalks were jammed,
the faces she saw were as unfamiliar as the signs overhead, new
people, many rough-looking men and tawdrily dressed women.  The
streets were black with loafing negroes who leaned against walls or
sat on the curbing watching vehicles go past with the naive
curiosity of children at a circus parade.

"Free issue country niggers," snorted Mammy.  "Ain' never seed a
proper cah'ige in dere lives.  An' impident lookin', too."

They were impudent looking, Scarlett agreed, for they stared at her
in an insolent manner, but she forgot them in the renewed shock of
seeing blue uniforms.  The town was full of Yankee soldiers, on
horses, afoot, in army wagons, loafing on the street, reeling out
of barrooms.

I'll never get used to them, she thought, clenching her fists.
Never! and over her shoulder:  "Hurry, Mammy, let's get out of this
crowd."

"Soon's Ah kick dis black trash outer mah way," answered Mammy
loudly, swinging the carpetbag at a black buck who loitered
tantalizingly in front of her and making him leap aside.  "Ah doan
lak disyere town, Miss Scarlett.  It's too full of Yankees an'
cheap free issue."

"It's nicer where it isn't so crowded.  When we get across Five
Points, it won't be so bad."

They picked their way across the slippery stepping stones that
bridged the mud of Decatur Street and continued up Peachtree,
through a thinning crowd.  When they reached Wesley Chapel where
Scarlett had paused to catch her breath that day in 1864 when she
had run for Dr. Meade, she looked at it and laughed aloud, shortly
and grimly.  Mammy's quick old eyes sought hers with suspicion and
question but her curiosity went unsatisfied.  Scarlett was
recalling with contempt the terror which had ridden her that day.
She had been crawling with fear, rotten with fear, terrified by the
Yankees, terrified by the approaching birth of Beau.  Now she
wondered how she could have been so frightened, frightened like a
child at a loud noise.  And what a child she had been to think that
Yankees and fire and defeat were the worst things that could happen
to her!  What trivialities they were beside Ellen's death and
Gerald's vagueness, beside hunger and cold and back-breaking work
and the living nightmare of insecurity.  How easy she would find it
now to be brave before an invading army, but how hard to face the
danger that threatened Tara!  No, she would never again be afraid
of anything except poverty.

Up Peachtree came a closed carriage and Scarlett went to the curb
eagerly to see if she knew the occupant, for Aunt Pitty's house was
still several blocks away.  She and Mammy leaned forward as the
carriage came abreast and Scarlett, with a smile arranged, almost
called out when a woman's head appeared for a moment at the window--
a too bright red head beneath a fine fur hat.  Scarlett took a
step back as mutual recognition leaped into both faces.  It was
Belle Watling and Scarlett had a glimpse of nostrils distended with
dislike before she disappeared again.  Strange that Belle's should
be the first familiar face she saw.

"Who dat?" questioned Mammy suspiciously.  "She knowed you but she
din' bow.  Ah ain' never seed ha'r dat color in mah life.  Not even
in de Tarleton fambly.  It look--well, it look dyed ter me!"

"It is," said Scarlett shortly, walking faster.

"Does you know a dyed-ha'rd woman?  Ah ast you who she is."

"She's the town bad woman," said Scarlett briefly, "and I give you
my word I don't know her, so shut up."

"Gawdlmighty!" breathed Mammy, her jaw dropping as she looked after
the carriage with passionate curiosity.  She had not seen a
professional bad woman since she left Savannah with Ellen more than
twenty years before and she wished ardently that she had observed
Belle more closely.

"She sho dressed up fine an' got a fine cah'ige an' coachman," she
muttered.  "Ah doan know whut de Lawd thinkin' 'bout lettin' de bad
women flurrish lak dat w'en us good folks is hongry an' mos'
barefoot."

"The Lord stopped thinking about us years ago," said Scarlett
savagely.  "And don't go telling me Mother is turning in her grave
to hear me say it, either."

She wanted to feel superior and virtuous about Belle but she could
not.  If her plans went well, she might be on the same footing with
Belle and supported by the same man.  While she did not regret her
decision one whit, the matter in its true light discomfited her.
"I won't think of it now," she told herself and hurried her steps.

They passed the lot where the Meade house had stood and there
remained of it only a forlorn pair of stone steps and a walk,
leading up to nothing.  Where the Whitings' home had been was bare
ground.  Even the foundation stones and the brick chimneys were
gone and there were wagon tracks where they had been carted away.
The brick house of the Elsings still stood, with a new roof and a
new second floor.  The Bonnell home, awkwardly patched and roofed
with rude boards instead of shingles, managed to look livable for
all its battered appearance.  But in neither house was there a face
at the window or a figure on the porch, and Scarlett was glad.  She
did not want to talk to anyone now.

Then the new slate roof of Aunt Pitty's house came in view with its
red-brick walls, and Scarlett's heart throbbed.  How good of the
Lord not to level it beyond repair!  Coming out of the front yard
was Uncle Peter, a market basket on his arm, and when he saw
Scarlett and Mammy trudging along, a wide, incredulous smile split
his black face.

I could kiss the old black fool, I'm so glad to see him, thought
Scarlett, joyfully and she called:  "Run get Auntie's swoon bottle,
Peter!  It's really me!"



That night the inevitable hominy and dried peas were on Aunt
Pitty's supper table and, as Scarlett ate them, she made a vow that
these two dishes would never appear on her table when she had money
again.  And, no matter what price she had to pay, she was going to
have money again, more than just enough to pay the taxes on Tara.
Somehow, some day she was going to have plenty of money if she had
to commit murder to get it.

In the yellow lamplight of the dining room, she asked Pitty about
her finances, hoping against hope that Charles' family might be
able to lend her the money she needed.  The questions were none too
subtle but Pitty, in her pleasure at having a member of the family
to talk to, did not even notice the bald way the questions were
put.  She plunged with tears into the details of her misfortunes.
She just didn't know where her farms and town property and money
had gone but everything had slipped away.  At least, that was what
Brother Henry told her.  He hadn't been able to pay the taxes on
her estate.  Everything except the house she was living in was gone
and Pitty did not stop to think that the house had never been hers
but was the joint property of Melanie and Scarlett.  Brother Henry
could just barely pay taxes on this house.  He gave her a little
something every month to live on and, though it was very
humiliating to take money from him, she had to do it.

"Brother Henry says he doesn't know how he'll make ends meet with
the load he's carrying and the taxes so high but, of course, he's
probably lying and has loads of money and just won't give me much."

Scarlett knew Uncle Henry wasn't lying.  The few letters she had
had from him in connection with Charles' property showed that.  The
old lawyer was battling valiantly to save the house and the one
piece of downtown property where the warehouse had been, so Wade
and Scarlett would have something left from the wreckage.  Scarlett
knew he was carrying these taxes for her at a great sacrifice.

"Of course, he hasn't any money," thought Scarlett grimly.  "Well,
check him and Aunt Pitty off my list.  There's nobody left but
Rhett.  I'll have to do it.  I must do it.  But I mustn't think
about it now. . . .  I must get her to talking about Rhett so I can
casually suggest to her to invite him to call tomorrow."

She smiled and squeezed the plump palms of Aunt Pitty between her
own.

"Darling Auntie," she said, "don't let's talk about distressing
things like money any more.  Let's forget about them and talk of
pleasanter things.  You must tell me all the news about our old
friends.  How is Mrs. Merriwether and Maybelle?  I heard that
Maybelle's little Creole came home safely.  How are the Elsings and
Dr. and Mrs. Meade?"

Pittypat brightened at the change of subject and her baby face
stopped quivering with tears.  She gave detailed reports about old
neighbors, what they were doing and wearing and eating and
thinking.  She told with accents of horror how, before Rene Picard
came home from the war, Mrs. Merriwether and Maybelle had made ends
meet by baking pies and selling them to the Yankee soldiers.
Imagine that!  Sometimes there were two dozen Yankees standing in
the back yard of the Merriwether home, waiting for the baking to be
finished.  Now that Rene was home, he drove an old wagon to the
Yankee camp every day and sold cakes and pies and beaten biscuits
to the soldiers.  Mrs. Merriwether said that when she made a little
more money she was going to open a bake shop downtown.  Pitty did
not wish to criticize but after all--  As for herself, said Pitty,
she would rather starve than have such commerce with Yankees.  She
made a point of giving a disdainful look to every soldier she met,
and crossed to the other side of the street in as insulting a
manner as possible, though, she said, this was quite inconvenient
in wet weather.  Scarlett gathered that no sacrifice, even though
it be muddy shoes, was too great to show loyalty to the Confederacy
in so far as Miss Pittypat was concerned.

Mrs. Meade and the doctor had lost their home when the Yankees
fired the town and they had neither the money nor the heart to
rebuild, now that Phil and Darcy were dead.  Mrs. Meade said she
never wanted a home again, for what was a home without children and
grandchildren in it?  They were very lonely and had gone to live
with the Elsings who had rebuilt the damaged part of their home.
Mr. and Mrs. Whiting had a room there, too, and Mrs. Bonnell was
talking of moving in, if she was fortunate enough to rent her house
to a Yankee officer and his family.

"But how do they all squeeze in?" cried Scarlett.  "There's Mrs.
Elsing and Fanny and Hugh--"

"Mrs. Elsing and Fanny sleep in the parlor and Hugh in the attic,"
explained Pitty, who knew the domestic arrangements of all her
friends.  "My dear, I do hate to tell you this but--Mrs. Elsing
calls them 'paying guests' but," Pitty dropped her voice, "they are
really nothing at all except boarders.  Mrs. Elsing is running a
boarding house!  Isn't that dreadful?"

"I think it's wonderful," said Scarlett shortly.  "I only wish we'd
had 'paying guests' at Tara for the last year instead of free
boarders.  Maybe we wouldn't be so poor now."

"Scarlett, how can you say such things?  Your poor mother must be
turning in her grave at the very thought of charging money for the
hospitality of Tara!  Of course, Mrs. Elsing was simply forced to
it because, while she took in fine sewing and Fanny painted china
and Hugh made a little money peddling firewood, they couldn't make
ends meet.  Imagine darling Hugh forced to peddle wood!  And he all
set to be a fine lawyer!  I could just cry at the things our boys
are reduced to!"

Scarlett thought of the rows of cotton beneath the glaring coppery
sky at Tara and how her back had ached as she bent over them.  She
remembered the feel of plow handles between her inexperienced,
blistered palms and she felt that Hugh Elsing was deserving of no
special sympathy.  What an innocent old fool Pitty was and, despite
the ruin all around her, how sheltered!

"If he doesn't like peddling, why doesn't he practice law?  Or
isn't there any law practice left in Atlanta?"

"Oh dear, yes!  There's plenty of law practice.  Practically
everybody is suing everybody else these days.  With everything
burned down and boundary lines wiped out, no one knows just where
their land begins or ends.  But you can't get any pay for suing
because nobody has any money.  So Hugh sticks to his peddling. . . .
Oh, I almost forgot!  Did I write you?  Fanny Elsing is getting
married tomorrow night and, of course, you must attend.  Mrs.
Elsing will be only too pleased to have you when she knows you're
in town.  I do hope you have some other frock besides that one.
Not that it isn't a very sweet frock, darling, but--well, it does
look a bit worn.  Oh, you have a pretty frock?  I'm so glad because
it's going to be the first real wedding we've had in Atlanta since
before the town fell.  Cake and wine and dancing afterward, though
I don't know how the Elsings can afford it, they are so poor."

"Who is Fanny marrying?  I thought after Dallas McLure was killed
at Gettysburg--"

"Darling, you mustn't criticize Fanny.  Everybody isn't as loyal to
the dead as you are to poor Charlie.  Let me see.  What is his
name?  I can never remember names--Tom somebody.  I knew his mother
well, we went to LaGrange Female Institute together.  She was a
Tomlinson from LaGrange and her mother was--let me see. . . .
Perkins?  Parkins?  Parkinson!  That's it.  From Sparta.  A very
good family but just the same--well, I know I shouldn't say it but
I don't see how Fanny can bring herself to marry him!"

"Does he drink or--"

"Dear, no!  His character is perfect but, you see, he was wounded
low down, by a bursting shell and it did something to his legs--
makes them--makes them, well, I hate to use the word but it makes
him spraddle.  It gives him a very vulgar appearance when he walks--
well, it doesn't look very pretty.  I don't see why she's marrying
him."

"Girls have to marry someone."

"Indeed, they do not," said Pitty, ruffling.  "I never had to."

"Now, darling, I didn't mean you!  Everybody knows how popular you
were and still are!  Why, old Judge Canton used to throw sheep's
eyes at you till I--"

"Oh, Scarlett, hush!  That old fool!" giggled Pitty, good humor
restored.  "But, after all, Fanny was so popular she could have
made a better match and I don't believe she loves this Tom what's-
his-name.  I don't believe she's ever gotten over Dallas McLure
getting killed, but she's not like you, darling.  You've remained
so faithful to dear Charlie, though you could have married dozens
of times.  Melly and I have often said how loyal you were to his
memory when everyone else said you were just a heartless coquette."

Scarlett passed over this tactless confidence and skillfully led
Pitty from one friend to another but all the while she was in a
fever of impatience to bring the conversation around to Rhett.  It
would never do for her to ask outright about him, so soon after
arriving.  It might start the old lady's mind to working on
channels better left untouched.  There would be time enough for
Pitty's suspicions to be aroused if Rhett refused to marry her.

Aunt Pitty prattled on happily, pleased as a child at having an
audience.  Things in Atlanta were in a dreadful pass, she said, due
to the vile doings of the Republicans.  There was no end to their
goings on and the worst thing was the way they were putting ideas
in the poor darkies' heads.

"My dear, they want to let the darkies vote!  Did you ever hear of
anything more silly?  Though--I don't know--now that I think about
it, Uncle Peter has much more sense than any Republican I ever saw
and much better manners but, of course, Uncle Peter is far too well
bred to want to vote.  But the very notion has upset the darkies
till they're right addled.  And some of them are so insolent.  Your
life isn't safe on the streets after dark and even in the broad
daylight they push ladies off the sidewalks into the mud.  And if
any gentleman dares to protest, they arrest him and--  My dear, did
I tell you that Captain Butler was in jail?"

"Rhett Butler?"

Even with this startling news, Scarlett was grateful that Aunt
Pitty had saved her the necessity of bringing his name into the
conversation herself.

"Yes, indeed!"  Excitement colored Pitty's cheeks pink and she sat
upright.  "He's in jail this very minute for killing a negro and
they may hang him!  Imagine Captain Butler hanging!"

For a moment, the breath went out of Scarlett's lungs in a
sickening gasp and she could only stare at the fat old lady who was
so obviously pleased at the effect of her statement.

"They haven't proved it yet but somebody killed this darky who had
insulted a white woman.  And the Yankees are very upset because so
many uppity darkies have been killed recently.  They can't prove it
on Captain Butler but they want to make an example of someone, so
Dr. Meade says.  The doctor says that if they do hang him it will
be the first good honest job the Yankees ever did, but then, I
don't know. . . .  And to think that Captain Butler was here just a
week ago and brought me the loveliest quail you ever saw for a
present and he was asking about you and saying he feared he had
offended you during the siege and you would never forgive him."

"How long will he be in jail?"

"Nobody knows.  Perhaps till they hang him, but maybe they won't be
able to prove the killing on him, after all.  However, it doesn't
seem to bother the Yankees whether folks are guilty or not, so long
as they can hang somebody.  They are so upset"--Pitty dropped her
voice mysteriously--"about the Ku Klux Klan.  Do you have the Klan
down in the County?  My dear, I'm sure you must and Ashley just
doesn't tell you girls anything about it.  Klansmen aren't supposed
to tell.  They ride around at night dressed up like ghosts and call
on Carpetbaggers who steal money and negroes who are uppity.
Sometimes they just scare them and warn them to leave Atlanta, but
when they don't behave they whip them and," Pitty whispered,
"sometimes they kill them and leave them where they'll be easily
found with the Ku Klux card on them. . . .  And the Yankees are
very angry about it and want to make an example of someone. . . .
But Hugh Elsing told me he didn't think they'd hang Captain Butler
because the Yankees think he does know where the money is and just
won't tell.  They are trying to make him tell."

"The money?"

"Didn't you know?  Didn't I write you?  My dear, you have been
buried at Tara, haven't you?  The town simply buzzed when Captain
Butler came back here with a fine horse and carriage and his
pockets full of money, when all the rest of us didn't know where
our next meal was coming from.  It simply made everybody furious
that an old speculator who always said nasty things about the
Confederacy should have so much money when we were all so poor.
Everybody was bursting to know how he managed to save his money but
no one had the courage to ask him--except me and he just laughed
and said:  'In no honest way, you may be sure.'  You know how hard
it is to get anything sensible out of him."

"But of course, he made his money out of the blockade--"

"Of course, he did, honey, some of it.  But that's not a drop in
the bucket to what that man has really got.  Everybody, including
the Yankees, believes he's got millions of dollars in gold
belonging to the Confederate government hid out somewhere."

"Millions--in gold?"

"Well, honey, where did all our Confederate gold go to?  Somebody
got it and Captain Butler must be one of the somebodies.  The
Yankees thought President Davis had it when he left Richmond but
when they captured the poor man he had hardly a cent.  There just
wasn't any money in the treasury when the war was over and everybody
thinks some of the blockade runners got it and are keeping quiet
about it."

"Millions--in gold!  But how--"

"Didn't Captain Butler take thousands of bales of cotton to England
and Nassau to sell for the Confederate government?" asked Pitty
triumphantly.  "Not only his own cotton but government cotton too?
And you know what cotton brought in England during the war!  Any
price you wanted to ask!  He was a free agent acting for the
government and he was supposed to sell the cotton and buy guns with
the money and run the guns in for us.  Well, when the blockade got
too tight, he couldn't bring in the guns and he couldn't have spent
one one-hundredth of the cotton money on them anyway, so there
were simply millions of dollars in English banks put there by
Captain Butler and other blockaders, waiting till the blockade
loosened. And you can't tell me they banked that money in the name
of the Confederacy.  They put it in their own names and it's still
there. . . .  Everybody has been talking about it ever since the
surrender and criticizing the blockaders severely, and when the
Yankees arrested Captain Butler for killing this darky they must
have heard the rumor, because they've been at him to tell them where
the money is.  You see, all of our Confederate funds belong to the
Yankees now--at least, the Yankees think so.  But Captain Butler
says he doesn't know anything. . . .  Dr. Meade says they ought to
hang him anyhow, only hanging is too good for a thief and a
profiteer--  Dear, you look so oddly!  Do you feel faint?  Have I
upset you talking like this?  I knew he was once a beau of yours but
I thought you'd fallen out long ago.  Personally, I never approved
of him, for he's such a scamp--"

"He's no friend of mine," said Scarlett with an effort.  "I had a
quarrel with him during the siege, after you went to Macon.  Where--
where is he?"

"In the firehouse over near the public square!"

"In the firehouse?"

Aunt Pitty crowed with laughter.

"Yes, he's in the firehouse.  The Yankees use it for a military
jail now.  The Yankees are camped in huts all round the city hall
in the square and the firehouse is just down the street, so that's
where Captain Butler is.  And Scarlett, I heard the funniest thing
yesterday about Captain Butler.  I forget who told me.  You know
how well groomed he always was--really a dandy--and they've been
keeping him in the firehouse and not letting him bathe and every
day he's been insisting that he wanted a bath and finally they led
him out of his cell onto the square and there was a long horse
trough where the whole regiment had bathed in the same water!  And
they told him he could bathe there and he said No, that he
preferred his own brand of Southern dirt to Yankee dirt and--"

Scarlett heard the cheerful babbling voice going on and on but she
did not hear the words.  In her mind there were only two ideas,
Rhett had more money than she had even hoped and he was in jail.
The fact that he was in jail and possibly might be hanged changed
the face of matters somewhat, in fact made them look a little
brighter.  She had very little feeling about Rhett being hanged.
Her need of money was too pressing, too desperate, for her to
bother about his ultimate fate.  Besides, she half shared Dr.
Meade's opinion that hanging was too good for him.  Any man who'd
leave a woman stranded between two armies in the middle of the
night, just to go off and fight for a Cause already lost, deserved
hanging. . . .  If she could somehow manage to marry him while he
was in jail, all those millions would be hers and hers alone should
he be executed.  And if marriage was not possible, perhaps she
could get a loan from him by promising to marry him when he was
released or by promising--oh promising anything!  And if they
hanged him, her day of settlement would never come.

For a moment her imagination flamed at the thought of being made a
widow by the kindly intervention of the Yankee government.
Millions in gold!  She could repair Tara and hire hands and plant
miles and miles of cotton.  And she could have pretty clothes and
all she wanted to eat and so could Suellen and Carreen.  And Wade
could have nourishing food to fill out his thin cheeks and warm
clothes and a governess and afterward go to the university . . .
and not grow up barefooted and ignorant like a Cracker.  And a good
doctor could look after Pa and as for Ashley--what couldn't she do
for Ashley!

Aunt Pittypat's monologue broke off suddenly as she said
inquiringly:  "Yes, Mammy?" and Scarlett, coming back from dreams,
saw Mammy standing in the doorway, her hands under her apron and in
her eyes an alert piercing look.  She wondered how long Mammy had
been standing there and how much she had heard and observed.
Probably everything, to judge by the gleam in her old eyes.

"Miss Scarlett look lak she tared.  Ah spec she better go ter bed."

"I am tired," said Scarlett, rising and meeting Mammy's eyes with a
childlike, helpless look, "and I'm afraid I'm catching a cold too.
Aunt Pitty, would you mind if I stayed in bed tomorrow and didn't
go calling with you?  I can go calling any time and I'm so anxious
to go to Fanny's wedding tomorrow night.  And if my cold gets worse
I won't be able to go.  And a day in bed would be such a lovely
treat for me."

Mammy's look changed to faint worry as she felt Scarlett's hands
and looked into her face.  She certainly didn't look well.  The
excitement of her thoughts had abruptly ebbed, leaving her white
and shaking.

"Yo' han's lak ice, honey.  You come ter bed an' Ah'll brew you
some sassfrass tea an' git you a hot brick ter mek you sweat."

"How thoughtless I've been," cried the plump old lady, hopping from
her chair and patting Scarlett's arm.  "Just chattering on and not
thinking of you.  Honey, you shall stay in bed all tomorrow and
rest up and we can gossip together--  Oh, dear, no!  I can't be
with you.  I've promised to sit with Mrs. Bonnell tomorrow.  She is
down with la grippe and so is her cook.  Mammy, I'm so glad you are
here.  You must go over with me in the morning and help me."

Mammy hurried Scarlett up the dark stairs, muttering fussy remarks
about cold hands and thin shoes and Scarlett looked meek and was
well content.  If she could only lull Mammy's suspicions further
and get her out of the house in the morning, all would be well.
Then she could go to the Yankee jail and see Rhett.  As she climbed
the stairs, the faint rumbling of thunder began and, standing on
the well-remembered landing, she thought how like the siege cannon
it sounded.  She shivered.  Forever, thunder would mean cannon and
war to her.



CHAPTER XXXIV


The sun shone intermittently the next morning and the hard wind
that drove dark clouds swiftly across its face rattled the
windowpanes and moaned faintly about the house.  Scarlett said a
brief prayer of thanksgiving that the rain of the previous night
had ceased, for she had lain awake listening to it, knowing that it
would mean the ruin of her velvet dress and new bonnet.  Now that
she could catch fleeting glimpses of the sun, her spirits soared.
She could hardly remain in bed and look languid and make croaking
noises until Aunt Pitty, Mammy and Uncle Peter were out of the
house and on their way to Mrs. Bonnell's.  When, at last, the front
gate banged and she was alone in the house, except for Cookie who
was singing in the kitchen, she leaped from the bed and lifted her
new clothes from the closet hooks.

Sleep had refreshed her and given her strength and from the cold
hard core at the bottom of her heart, she drew courage.  There was
something about the prospect of a struggle of wits with a man--with
any man--that put her on her mettle and, after months of battling
against countless discouragements, the knowledge that she was at
last facing a definite adversary, one whom she might unhorse by her
own efforts, gave her a buoyant sensation.

Dressing unaided was difficult but she finally accomplished it and
putting on the bonnet with its rakish feathers she ran to Aunt
Pitty's room to preen herself in front of the long mirror.  How
pretty she looked!  The cock feathers gave her a dashing air and
the dull-green velvet of the bonnet made her eyes startlingly
bright, almost emerald colored.  And the dress was incomparable, so
rich and handsome looking and yet so dignified!  It was wonderful
to have a lovely dress again.  It was so nice to know that she
looked pretty and provocative, and she impulsively bent forward and
kissed her reflection in the mirror and then laughed at her own
foolishness.  She picked up Ellen's Paisley shawl to wrap about her
but the colors of the faded old square clashed with the moss-green
dress and made her appear a little shabby.  Opening Aunt Pitty's
closet she removed a black broadcloth cloak, a thin fall garment
which Pitty used only for Sunday wear, and put it on.  She slipped
into her pierced ears the diamond earrings she had brought from
Tara, and tossed her head to observe the effect.  They made
pleasant clicking noises which were very satisfactory and she
thought that she must remember to toss her head frequently when
with Rhett.  Dancing earrings always attracted a man and gave a
girl such a spirited air.

What a shame Aunt Pitty had no other gloves than the ones now on
her fat hands!  No woman could really feel like a lady without
gloves, but Scarlett had not had a pair since she left Atlanta.
And the long months of hard work at Tara had roughened her hands
until they were far from pretty.  Well, it couldn't be helped.
She'd take Aunt Pitty's little seal muff and hide her bare hands in
it.  Scarlett felt that it gave her the final finishing touch of
elegance.  No one, looking at her now, would suspect that poverty
and want were standing at her shoulder.

It was so important that Rhett should not suspect.  He must not
think that anything but tender feelings were driving her.

She tiptoed down the stairs and out of the house while Cookie
bawled on unconcernedly in the kitchen.  She hastened down Baker
Street to avoid the all seeing eyes of the neighbors and sat down
on a carriage block on Ivy Street in front of a burned house, to
wait for some passing carriage or wagon which would give her a
ride.  The sun dipped in and out from behind hurrying clouds,
lighting the street with a false brightness which had no warmth in
it, and the wind fluttered the lace of her pantalets.  It was
colder than she had expected and she wrapped Aunt Pitty's thin
cloak about her and shivered impatiently.  Just as she was
preparing to start walking the long way across town to the Yankee
encampment, a battered wagon appeared.  In it was an old woman with
a lip full of snuff and a weather-beaten face under a drab
sunbonnet, driving a dawdling old mule.  She was going in the
direction of the city hall and she grudgingly gave Scarlett a ride.
But it was obvious that the dress, bonnet and muff found no favor
with her.

"She thinks I'm a hussy," thought Scarlett.  "And perhaps she's
right at that!"

When at last they reached the town square and the tall white cupola
of the city hall loomed up, she made her thanks, climbed down from
the wagon and watched the country woman drive off.  Looking around
carefully to see that she was not observed, she pinched her cheeks
to give them color and bit her lips until they stung to make them
red.  She adjusted the bonnet and smoothed back her hair and looked
about the square.  The two-story red-brick city hall had survived
the burning of the city.  But it looked forlorn and unkempt under
the gray sky.  Surrounding the building completely and covering the
square of land of which it was the center were row after row of
army huts, dingy and mud splashed.  Yankee soldiers loitered
everywhere and Scarlett looked at them uncertainly, some of her
courage deserting her.  How would she go about finding Rhett in
this enemy camp?

She looked down the street toward the firehouse and saw that the
wide arched doors were closed and heavily barred and two sentries
passed and repassed on each side of the building.  Rhett was in
there.  But what should she say to the Yankee soldiers?  And what
would they say to her?  She squared her shoulders.  If she hadn't
been afraid to kill one Yankee, she shouldn't fear merely talking
to another.

She picked her way precariously across the stepping stones of the
muddy street and walked forward until a sentry, his blue overcoat
buttoned high against the wind, stopped her.

"What is it, Ma'm?"  His voice had a strange mid-Western twang but
it was polite and respectful.

"I want to see a man in there--he is a prisoner."

"Well, I don't know," said the sentry, scratching his head.  "They
are mighty particular about visitors and--"  He stopped and peered
into her face sharply.  "Lord, lady!  Don't you cry!  You go over
to post headquarters and ask the officers.  They'll let you see
him, I bet."

Scarlett, who had no intention of crying, beamed at him.  He turned
to another sentry who was slowly pacing his beat:  "Yee-ah, Bill.
Come'eer."

The second sentry, a large man muffled in a blue overcoat from
which villainous black whiskers burst, came through the mud toward
them.

"You take this lady to headquarters."

Scarlett thanked him and followed the sentry.

"Mind you don't turn your ankle on those stepping stones," said the
soldier, taking her arm.  "And you'd better hist up your skirts a
little to keep them out of the mud."

The voice issuing from the whiskers had the same nasal twang but
was kind and pleasant and his hand was firm and respectful.  Why,
Yankees weren't bad at all!

"It's a mighty cold day for a lady to be out in," said her escort.
"Have you come a fer piece?"

"Oh, yes, from clear across the other side of town," she said,
warming to the kindness in his voice.

"This ain't no weather for a lady to be out in," said the soldier
reprovingly, "with all this la grippe in the air.  Here's Post
Command, lady--  What's the matter?"

"This house--this house is your headquarters?"  Scarlett looked up
at the lovely old dwelling facing on the square and could have
cried.  She had been to so many parties in this house during the
war.  It had been a gay beautiful place and now--there was a large
United States flag floating over it.

"What's the matter?"

"Nothing--only--only--I used to know the people who lived here."

"Well, that's too bad.  I guess they wouldn't know it themselves if
they saw it, for it shore is torn up on the inside.  Now, you go on
in, Ma'm, and ask for the captain."

She went up the steps, caressing the broken white banisters, and
pushed open the front door.  The hall was dark and as cold as a
vault and a shivering sentry was leaning against the closed folding
doors of what had been, in better days, the dining room.

"I want to see the captain," she said.

He pulled back the doors and she entered the room, her heart beating
rapidly, her face flushing with embarrassment and excitement.  There
was a close stuffy smell in the room, compounded of the smoking
fire, tobacco fumes, leather, damp woolen uniforms and unwashed
bodies.  She had a confused impression of bare walls with torn
wallpaper, rows of blue overcoats and slouch hats hung on nails, a
roaring fire, a long table covered with papers and a group of
officers in blue uniforms with brass buttons.

She gulped once and found her voice.  She mustn't let these Yankees
know she was afraid.  She must look and be her prettiest and most
unconcerned self.

"The captain?"

"I'm one captain," said a fat man whose tunic was unbuttoned.

"I want to see a prisoner, Captain Rhett Butler."

"Butler again?  He's popular, that man," laughed the captain,
taking a chewed cigar from his mouth.  "You a relative, Ma'm?"

"Yes--his--his sister."

He laughed again.

"He's got a lot of sisters, one of them here yesterday."

Scarlett flushed.  One of those creatures Rhett consorted with,
probably that Watling woman.  And these Yankees thought she was
another one.  It was unendurable.  Not even for Tara would she stay
here another minute and be insulted.  She turned to the door and
reached angrily for the knob but another officer was by her side
quickly.  He was clean shaven and young and had merry, kind eyes.

"Just a minute, Ma'm.  Won't you sit down here by the fire where
it's warm?  I'll go see what I can do about it.  What is your name?
He refused to see the--lady who called yesterday."

She sank into the proffered chair, glaring at the discomfited fat
captain, and gave her name.  The nice young officer slipped on his
overcoat and left the room and the others took themselves off to
the far end of the table where they talked in low tones and pawed
at the papers.  She stretched her feet gratefully toward the fire,
realizing for the first time how cold they were and wishing she had
thought to put a piece of cardboard over the hole in the sole of
one slipper.  After a time, voices murmured outside the door and
she heard Rhett's laugh.  The door opened, a cold draft swept the
room and Rhett appeared, hatless, a long cape thrown carelessly
across his shoulders.  He was dirty and unshaven and without a
cravat but somehow jaunty despite his dishabille, and his dark eyes
were snapping joyfully at the sight of her.

"Scarlett!"

He had her hands in both of his and, as always, there was something
hot and vital and exciting about his grip.  Before she quite knew
what he was about, he had bent and kissed her cheek, his mustache
tickling her.  As he felt the startled movement of her body away
from him, he hugged her about the shoulders and said:  "My darling
little sister!" and grinned down at her as if he relished her
helplessness in resisting his caress.  She couldn't help laughing
back at him for the advantage he had taken.  What a rogue he was!
Jail had not changed him one bit.

The fat captain was muttering through his cigar to the merry-eyed
officer.

"Most irregular.  He should be in the firehouse.  You know the
orders."

"Oh, for God's sake, Henry!  The lady would freeze in that barn."

"Oh, all right, all right!  It's your responsibility."

"I assure you, gentlemen," said Rhett, turning to them but still
keeping a grip on Scarlett's shoulders, "my--sister hasn't brought
me any saws or files to help me escape."

They all laughed and, as they did, Scarlett looked quickly about
her.  Good Heavens, was she going to have to talk to Rhett before
six Yankee officers!  Was he so dangerous a prisoner they wouldn't
let him out of their sight?  Seeing her anxious glance, the nice
officer pushed open a door and spoke brief low words to two
privates who had leaped to their feet at his entrance.  They picked
up their rifles and went out into the hall, closing the door behind
them.

"If you wish, you may sit here in the orderly room," said the young
captain.  "And don't try to bolt through that door.  The men are
just outside."

"You see what a desperate character I am, Scarlett," said Rhett.
"Thank you, Captain.  This is most kind of you."

He bowed carelessly and taking Scarlett's arm pulled her to her
feet and propelled her into the dingy orderly room.  She was never
to remember what the room looked like except that it was small and
dim and none too warm and there were handwritten papers tacked on
the mutilated walls and chairs which had cowhide seats with the
hair still on them.

When he had closed the door behind them, Rhett came to her swiftly
and bent over her.  Knowing his desire, she turned her head quickly
but smiled provocatively at him out of the corners of her eyes.

"Can't I really kiss you now?"

"On the forehead, like a good brother," she answered demurely.

"Thank you, no.  I prefer to wait and hope for better things."  His
eyes sought her lips and lingered there a moment.  "But how good of
you to come to see me, Scarlett!  You are the first respectable
citizen who has called on me since my incarceration, and being in
jail makes one appreciate friends.  When did you come to town?"

"Yesterday afternoon."

"And you came out this morning?  Why, my dear, you are more than
good."  He smiled down at her with the first expression of honest
pleasure she had ever seen on his face.  Scarlett smiled inwardly
with excitement and ducked her head as if embarrassed.

"Of course, I came out right away.  Aunt Pitty told me about you
last night and I--I just couldn't sleep all night for thinking how
awful it was.  Rhett, I'm so distressed!"

"Why, Scarlett!"

His voice was soft but there was a vibrant note in it, and looking
up into his dark face she saw in it none of the skepticism, the
jeering humor she knew so well.  Before his direct gaze her eyes
fell again in real confusion.  Things were going even better than
she hoped.

"It's worth being in jail to see you again and to hear you say
things like that.  I really couldn't believe my ears when they
brought me your name.  You see, I never expected you to forgive me
for my patriotic conduct that night on the road near Rough and
Ready.  But I take it that this call means you have forgiven me?"

She could feel swift anger stir, even at this late date, as she
thought of that night but she subdued it and tossed her head until
the earrings danced.

"No, I haven't forgiven you," she said and pouted.

"Another hope crushed.  And after I offered up myself for my
country and fought barefooted in the snow at Franklin and got the
finest case of dysentery you ever heard of for my pains!"

"I don't want to hear about your--pains," she said, still pouting
but smiling at him from up-tilted eyes.  "I still think you were
hateful that night and I never expect to forgive you.  Leaving me
alone like that when anything might have happened to me!"

"But nothing did happen to you.  So, you see, my confidence in you
was justified.  I knew you'd get home safely and God help any
Yankee who got in your way!"

"Rhett, why on earth did you do such a silly thing--enlisting at
the last minute when you knew we were going to get licked?  And
after all you'd said about idiots who went out and got shot!"

"Scarlett, spare me!  I am always overcome with shame when I think
about it."

"Well, I'm glad to learn you are ashamed of the way you treated
me."

"You misunderstand.  I regret to say that my conscience has not
troubled me at all about deserting you.  But as for enlisting--when
I think of joining the army in varnished boots and a white linen
suit and armed with only a pair of dueling pistols--  And those
long cold miles in the snow after my boots wore out and I had no
overcoat and nothing to eat . . . I cannot understand why I did not
desert.  It was all the purest insanity.  But it's in one's blood.
Southerners can never resist a losing cause.  But never mind my
reasons.  It's enough that I'm forgiven."

"You're not.  I think you're a hound."  But she caressed the last
word until it might have been "darling."

"Don't fib.  You've forgiven me.  Young ladies don't dare Yankee
sentries to see a prisoner, just for charity's sweet sake, and
come all dressed up in velvet and feathers and seal muffs too.
Scarlett, how pretty you look!  Thank God, you aren't in rags or
mourning!  I get so sick of women in dowdy old clothes and
perpetual crepe.  You look like the Rue de la Paix.  Turn around,
my dear, and let me look at you."

So he had noticed the dress.  Of course, he would notice such
things, being Rhett.  She laughed in soft excitement and spun about
on her toes, her arms extended, her hoops tilting up to show her
lace trimmed pantalets.  His black eyes took her in from bonnet to
heels in a glance that missed nothing, that old impudent unclothing
glance which always gave her goose bumps.

"You look very prosperous and very, very tidy.  And almost good
enough to eat.  If it wasn't for the Yankees outside--but you are
quite safe, my dear.  Sit down.  I won't take advantage of you as I
did the last time I saw you."  He rubbed his cheek with pseudo
ruefulness.  "Honestly, Scarlett, don't you think you were a bit
selfish that night?  Think of all I had done for you, risked my
life--stolen a horse--and such a horse!  Rushed to the defense of
Our Glorious Cause!  And what did I get for my pains?  Some hard
words and a very hard slap in the face."

She sat down.  The conversation was not going in quite the
direction she hoped.  He had seemed so nice when he first saw her,
so genuinely glad she had come.  He had almost seemed like a human
being and not the perverse wretch she knew so well.

"Must you always get something for your pains?"

"Why, of course!  I am a monster of selfishness, as you ought to
know.  I always expect payment for anything I give."

That sent a slight chill through her but she rallied and jingled
her earbobs again.

"Oh, you really aren't so bad, Rhett.  You just like to show off."

"My word, but you have changed!" he said and laughed.  "What has
made a Christian of you?  I have kept up with you through Miss
Pittypat but she gave me no intimation that you had developed
womanly sweetness.  Tell me more about yourself, Scarlett.  What
have you been doing since I last saw you?"

The old irritation and antagonism which he roused in her was hot in
her heart and she yearned to speak tart words.  But she smiled
instead and the dimple crept into her cheek.  He had drawn a chair
close beside hers and she leaned over and put a gentle hand on his
arm, in an unconscious manner.

"Oh, I've been doing nicely, thank you, and everything at Tara is
fine now.  Of course, we had a dreadful time right after Sherman
went through but, after all, he didn't burn the house and the
darkies saved most of the livestock by driving it into the swamp.
And we cleared a fair crop this last fall, twenty bales.  Of
course, that's practically nothing compared with what Tara can do
but we haven't many field hands.  Pa says, of course, we'll do
better next year.  But, Rhett, it's so dull in the country now!
Imagine, there aren't any balls or barbecues and the only thing
people talk about is hard times!  Goodness, I get sick of it!
Finally last week I got too bored to stand it any longer, so Pa
said I must take a trip and have a good time.  So I came up here to
get me some frocks made and then I'm going over to Charleston to
visit my aunt.  It'll be lovely to go to balls again."

There, she thought with pride, I delivered that with just the right
airy way!  Not too rich but certainly not poor.

"You look beautiful in ball dresses, my dear, and you know it too,
worse luck!  I suppose the real reason you are going visiting is
that you have run through the County swains and are seeking fresh
ones in fields afar."

Scarlett had a thankful thought that Rhett had spent the last
several months abroad and had only recently come back to Atlanta.
Otherwise, he would never have made so ridiculous a statement.  She
thought briefly of the County swains, the ragged embittered little
Fontaines, the poverty-stricken Munroe boys, the Jonesboro and
Fayetteville beaux who were so busy plowing, splitting rails and
nursing sick old animals that they had forgotten such things as
balls and pleasant flirtations ever existed.  But she put down this
memory and giggled self-consciously as if admitting the truth of
his assertion.

"Oh, well," she said deprecatingly.

"You are a heartless creature, Scarlett, but perhaps that's part of
your charm."  He smiled in his old way, one corner of his mouth
curving down, but she knew he was complimenting her.  "For, of
course, you know you have more charm than the law should permit.
Even I have felt it, case-hardened though I am.  I've often
wondered what it was about you that made me always remember you,
for I've known many ladies who were prettier than you and certainly
more clever and, I fear, morally more upright and kind.  But,
somehow, I always remembered you.  Even during the months since the
surrender when I was in France and England and hadn't seen you or
heard of you and was enjoying the society of many beautiful ladies,
I always remembered you and wondered what you were doing."

For a moment she was indignant that he should say other women were
prettier, more clever and kind than she, but that momentary flare
was wiped out in her pleasure that he had remembered her and her
charm.  So he hadn't forgotten!  That would make things easier.
And he was behaving so nicely, almost like a gentleman would do
under the circumstances.  Now, all she had to do was bring the
subject around to himself, so she could intimate that she had not
forgotten him either and then--

She gently squeezed his arm and dimpled again.

"Oh, Rhett, how you do run on, teasing a country girl like me!  I
know mighty well you never gave me a thought after you left me that
night.  You can't tell me you ever thought of me with all those
pretty French and English girls around you.  But I didn't come all
the way out here to hear you talk foolishness about me.  I came--I
came--because--"

"Because?"

"Oh, Rhett, I'm so terribly distressed about you!  So frightened
for you!  When will they let you out of that terrible place?"

He swiftly covered her hand with his and held it hard against his
arm.

"Your distress does you credit.  There's no telling when I'll be
out.  Probably when they've stretched the rope a bit more."

"The rope?"

"Yes, I expect to make my exit from here at the rope's end."

"They won't really hang you?"

"They will if they can get a little more evidence against me."

"Oh, Rhett!" she cried, her hand at her heart.

"Would you be sorry?  If you are sorry enough, I'll mention you in
my will."

His dark eyes laughed at her recklessly and he squeezed her hand.

His will!  She hastily cast down her eyes for fear of betrayal but
not swiftly enough, for his eyes gleamed, suddenly curious.

"According to the Yankees, I ought to have a fine will.  There
seems to be considerable interest in my finances at present.  Every
day, I am hauled up before another board of inquiry and asked
foolish questions.  The rumor seems current that I made off with
the mythical gold of the Confederacy."

"Well--did you?"

"What a leading question!  You know as well as I do that the
Confederacy ran a printing press instead of a mint."

"Where did you get all your money?  Speculating?  Aunt Pittypat
said--"

"What probing questions you ask!"

Damn him!  Of course, he had the money.  She was so excited it
became difficult to talk sweetly to him.

"Rhett, I'm so upset about your being here.  Don't you think
there's a chance of your getting out?"

"'Nihil desperandum' is my motto."

"What does that mean?"

"It means 'maybe,' my charming ignoramus."

She fluttered her thick lashes up to look at him and fluttered them
down again.

"Oh, you're too smart to let them hang you!  I know you'll think of
some clever way to beat them and get out!  And when you do--"

"And when I do?" he asked softly, leaning closer.

"Well, I--" and she managed a pretty confusion and a blush.  The
blush was not difficult for she was breathless and her heart was
beating like a drum.  "Rhett, I'm so sorry about what I--I said to
you that night--you know--at Rough and Ready.  I was--oh, so very
frightened and upset and you were so--so--"  She looked down and
saw his brown hand tighten over hers.  "And--I thought then that
I'd never, never forgive you!  But when Aunt Pitty told me
yesterday that you--that they might hang you--it came over me of a
sudden and I--I--"  She looked up into his eyes with one swift
imploring glance and in it she put an agony of heartbreak.  "Oh,
Rhett, I'd die if they hanged you!  I couldn't bear it!  You see,
I--"  And, because she could not longer sustain the hot leaping
light that was in his eyes, her lids fluttered down again.

In a moment I'll be crying, she thought in a frenzy of wonder and
excitement.  Shall I let myself cry?  Would that seem more natural?

He said quickly:  "My God, Scarlett, you can't mean that you--" and
his hands closed over hers in so hard a grip that it hurt.

She shut her eyes tightly, trying to squeeze out tears, but
remembered to turn her face up slightly so he could kiss her with
no difficulty.  Now, in an instant his lips would be upon hers, the
hard insistent lips which she suddenly remembered with a vividness
that left her weak.  But he did not kiss her.  Disappointment
queerly stirring her, she opened her eyes a trifle and ventured a
peep at him.  His black head was bent over her hands and, as she
watched, he lifted one and kissed it and, taking the other, laid it
against his cheek for a moment.  Expecting violence, this gentle
and loverlike gesture startled her.  She wondered what expression
was on his face but could not tell for his head was bowed.

She quickly lowered her gaze lest he should look up suddenly and
see the expression on her face.  She knew that the feeling of
triumph surging through her was certain to be plain in her eyes.
In a moment he would ask her to marry him--or at least say that he
loved her and then . . .  As she watched him through the veil of
her lashes he turned her hand over, palm up, to kiss it too, and
suddenly he drew a quick breath.  Looking down she saw her own
palm, saw it as it really was for the first time in a year, and a
cold sinking fear gripped her.  This was a stranger's palm, not
Scarlett O'Hara's soft, white, dimpled, helpless one.  This hand
was rough from work, brown with sunburn, splotched with freckles.
The nails were broken and irregular, there were heavy calluses on
the cushions of the palm, a half-healed blister on the thumb.  The
red scar which boiling fat had left last month was ugly and
glaring.  She looked at it in horror and, before she thought, she
swiftly clenched her fist.

Still he did not raise his head.  Still she could not see his face.
He pried her fist open inexorably and stared at it, picked up her
other hand and held them both together silently, looking down at
them.

"Look at me," he said finally raising his head, and his voice was
very quiet.  "And drop that demure expression."

Unwillingly she met his eyes, defiance and perturbation on her
face.  His black brows were up and his eyes gleamed.

"So you have been doing very nicely at Tara, have you?  Cleared so
much money on the cotton you can go visiting.  What have you been
doing with your hands--plowing?"

She tried to wrench them away but he held them hard, running his
thumbs over the calluses.

"These are not the hands of a lady," he said and tossed them into
her lap.

"Oh, shut up!" she cried, feeling a momentary intense relief at
being able to speak her feelings.  "Whose business is it what I do
with my hands?"

What a fool I am, she thought vehemently.  I should have borrowed
or stolen Aunt Pitty's gloves.  But I didn't realize my hands
looked so bad.  Of course, he would notice them.  And now I've lost
my temper and probably ruined everything.  Oh, to have this happen
when he was right at the point of a declaration!

"Your hands are certainly no business of mine," said Rhett coolly
and lounged back in his chair indolently, his face a smooth blank.

So he was going to be difficult.  Well, she'd have to bear it
meekly, much as she disliked it, if she expected to snatch victory
from this debacle.  Perhaps if she sweet-talked him--

"I think you're real rude to throw off on my poor hands.  Just
because I went riding last week without my gloves and ruined them--"

"Riding, hell!" he said in the same level voice.  "You've been
working with those hands, working like a nigger.  What's the
answer?  Why did you lie to me about everything being nice at
Tara?"

"Now, Rhett--"

"Suppose we get down to the truth.  What is the real purpose of
your visit?  Almost, I was persuaded by your coquettish airs that
you cared something about me and were sorry for me."

"Oh, I am sorry!  Indeed--"

"No, you aren't.  They can hang me higher than Haman for all you
care.  It's written as plainly on your face as hard work is written
on your hands.  You wanted something from me and you wanted it
badly enough to put on quite a show.  Why didn't you come out in
the open and tell me what it was?  You'd have stood a much better
chance of getting it, for if there's one virtue I value in women
it's frankness.  But no, you had to come jingling your earbobs and
pouting and frisking like a prostitute with a prospective client."

He did not raise his voice at the last words or emphasize them in
any way but to Scarlett they cracked like a whiplash, and with
despair she saw the end of her hopes of getting him to propose
marriage.  Had he exploded with rage and injured vanity or
upbraided her, as other men would have done, she could have handled
him.  But the deadly quietness of his voice frightened her, left
her utterly at a loss as to her next move.  Although he was a
prisoner and the Yankees were in the next room, it came to her
suddenly that Rhett Butler was a dangerous man to run afoul of.

"I suppose my memory is getting faulty.  I should have recalled
that you are just like me and that you never do anything without an
ulterior motive.  Now, let me see.  What could you have had up your
sleeve, Mrs. Hamilton?  It isn't possible that you were so
misguided as to think I would propose matrimony?"

Her face went crimson and she did not answer.

"But you can't have forgotten my oft-repeated remark that I am not
a marrying man?"

When she did not speak, he said with sudden violence:

"You hadn't forgotten?  Answer me."

"I hadn't forgotten," she said wretchedly.

"What a gambler you are, Scarlett," he jeered.  "You took a chance
that my incarceration away from female companionship would put me
in such a state I'd snap at you like a trout at a worm."

And that's what you did, thought Scarlett with inward rage, and if
it hadn't been for my hands--

"Now, we have most of the truth, everything except your reason.
See if you can tell me the truth about why you wanted to lead me
into wedlock."

There was a suave, almost teasing note in his voice and she took
heart.  Perhaps everything wasn't lost, after all.  Of course, she
had ruined any hope of marriage but, even in her despair, she was
glad.  There was something about this immobile man which frightened
her, so that now the thought of marrying him was fearful.  But
perhaps if she was clever and played on his sympathies and his
memories, she could secure a loan.  She pulled her face into a
placating and childlike expression.

"Oh, Rhett, you can help me so much--if you'll just be sweet."

"There's nothing I like better than being--sweet."

"Rhett, for old friendship's sake, I want you to do me a favor."

"So, at last the horny-handed lady comes to her real mission.  I
feared that 'visiting the sick and the imprisoned' was not your
proper role.  What do you want?  Money?"

The bluntness of his question ruined all hopes of leading up to the
matter in any circuitous and sentimental way.

"Don't be mean, Rhett," she coaxed.  "I do want some money.  I want
you to lend me three hundred dollars."

"The truth at last.  Talking love and thinking money.  How truly
feminine!  Do you need the money badly?"

"Oh, ye--  Well, not so terribly but I could use it."

"Three hundred dollars.  That's a vast amount of money.  What do
you want it for?"

"To pay taxes on Tara."

"So you want to borrow some money.  Well, since you're so
businesslike, I'll be businesslike too.  What collateral will you
give me?"

"What what?"

"Collateral.  Security on my investment.  Of course, I don't want
to lose all that money."  His voice was deceptively smooth, almost
silky, but she did not notice.  Maybe everything would turn out
nicely after all.

"My earrings."

"I'm not interested in earrings."

"I'll give you a mortgage on Tara."

"Now just what would I do with a farm?"

"Well, you could--you could--it's a good plantation.  And you
wouldn't lose.  I'd pay you back out of next year's cotton."

"I'm not so sure."  He tilted back in his chair and stuck his hands
in his pockets.  "Cotton prices are dropping.  Times are so hard
and money's so tight."

"Oh, Rhett, you are teasing me!  You know you have millions!"

There was a warm dancing malice in his eyes as he surveyed her.

"So everything is going nicely and you don't need the money very
badly.  Well, I'm glad to hear that.  I like to know that all is
well with old friends."

"Oh, Rhett, for God's sake . . ." she began desperately, her
courage and control breaking.

"Do lower your voice.  You don't want the Yankees to hear you, I
hope.  Did anyone ever tell you you had eyes like a cat--a cat in
the dark?"

"Rhett, don't!  I'll tell you everything.  I do need the money so
badly.  I--I lied about everything being all right.  Everything's
as wrong as it could be.  Father is--is--he's not himself.  He's
been queer ever since Mother died and he can't help me any.  He's
just like a child.  And we haven't a single field hand to work the
cotton and there's so many to feed, thirteen of us.  And the taxes--
they are so high.  Rhett, I'll tell you everything.  For over a
year we've been just this side of starvation.  Oh, you don't know!
You can't know!  We've never had enough to eat and it's terrible to
wake up hungry and go to sleep hungry.  And we haven't any warm
clothes and the children are always cold and sick and--"

"Where did you get the pretty dress?"

"It's made out of Mother's curtains," she answered, too desperate
to lie about this shame.  "I could stand being hungry and cold but
now--now the Carpetbaggers have raised our taxes.  And the money's
got to be paid right away.  And I haven't any money except one
five-dollar gold piece.  I've got to have money for the taxes!
Don't you see?  If I don't pay them, I'll--we'll lose Tara and we
just can't lose it!  I can't let it go!"

"Why didn't you tell me all this at first instead of preying on my
susceptible heart--always weak where pretty ladies are concerned?
No, Scarlett, don't cry.  You've tried every trick except that one
and I don't think I could stand it.  My feelings are already
lacerated with disappointment at discovering it was my money and
not my charming self you wanted."

She remembered that he frequently told bald truths about himself
when he spoke mockingly--mocking himself as well as others, and she
hastily looked up at him.  Were his feelings really hurt?  Did he
really care about her?  Had he been on the verge of a proposal when
he saw her palms?  Or had he only been leading up to another such
odious proposal as he had made twice before?  If he really cared
about her, perhaps she could smooth him down.  But his black eyes
raked her in no lover-like way and he was laughing softly.

"I don't like your collateral.  I'm no planter.  What else have you
to offer?"

Well, she had come to it at last.  Now for it!  She drew a deep
breath and met his eyes squarely, all coquetry and airs gone as her
spirit rushed out to grapple that which she feared most.

"I--I have myself."

"Yes?"

Her jaw line tightened to squareness and her eyes went emerald.

"You remember that night on Aunt Pitty's porch, during the siege?
You said--you said then that you wanted me."

He leaned back carelessly in his chair and looked into her tense
face and his own dark face was inscrutable.  Something flickered
behind his eyes but he said nothing.

"You said--you said you'd never wanted a woman as much as you
wanted me.  If you still want me, you can have me.  Rhett, I'll do
anything you say but, for God's sake, write me a draft for the
money!  My word's good.  I swear it.  I won't go back on it.  I'll
put it in writing if you like."

He looked at her oddly, still inscrutable and as she hurried on she
could not tell if he were amused or repelled.  If he would only say
something, anything!  She felt her cheeks getting hot.

"I have got to have the money soon, Rhett.  They'll turn us out in
the road and that damned overseer of Father's will own the place
and--"

"Just a minute.  What makes you think I still want you?  What makes
you think you are worth three hundred dollars?  Most women don't
come that high."

She blushed to her hair line and her humiliation was complete.

"Why are you doing this?  Why not let the farm go and live at Miss
Pittypat's.  You own half that house."

"Name of God!" she cried.  "Are you a fool?  I can't let Tara go.
It's home.  I won't let it go.  Not while I've got breath left in
me!"

"The Irish," said he, lowering his chair back to level and removing
his hands from his pockets, "are the damnedest race.  They put so
much emphasis on so many wrong things.  Land, for instance.  And
every bit of earth is just like every other bit.  Now, let me get
this straight, Scarlett.  You are coming to me with a business
proposition.  I'll give you three hundred dollars and you'll become
my mistress."

"Yes."

Now that the repulsive word had been said, she felt somehow easier
and hope awoke in her again.  He had said "I'll give you."  There
was a diabolic gleam in his eyes as if something amused him
greatly.

"And yet, when I had the effrontery to make you this same
proposition, you turned me out of the house.  And also you called
me a number of very hard names and mentioned in passing that you
didn't want a 'passel of brats.'  No, my dear, I'm not rubbing it
in.  I'm only wondering at the peculiarities of your mind.  You
wouldn't do it for your own pleasure but you will to keep the wolf
away from the door.  It proves my point that all virtue is merely a
matter of prices."

"Oh, Rhett, how you run on!  If you want to insult me, go on and do
it but give me the money."

She was breathing easier now.  Being what he was, Rhett would
naturally want to torment and insult her as much as possible to pay
her back for past slights and for her recent attempted trickery.
Well, she could stand it.  She could stand anything.  Tara was
worth it all.  For a brief moment it was mid-summer and the
afternoon skies were blue and she lay drowsily in the thick clover
of Tara's lawn, looking up at the billowing cloud castles, the
fragrance of white blossoms in her nose and the pleasant busy
humming of bees in her ears.  Afternoon and hush and the far-off
sound of the wagons coming in from the spiraling red fields.  Worth
it all, worth more.

Her head went up.

"Are you going to give me the money?"

He looked as if he were enjoying himself and when he spoke there
was suave brutality in his voice.

"No, I'm not," he said.

For a moment her mind could not adjust itself to his words.

"I couldn't give it to you, even if I wanted to.  I haven't a cent
on me.  Not a dollar in Atlanta.  I have some money, yes, but not
here.  And I'm not saying where it is or how much.  But if I tried
to draw a draft on it, the Yankees would be on me like a duck on a
June bug and then neither of us would get it.  What do you think of
that?"

Her face went an ugly green, freckles suddenly standing out across
her nose and her contorted mouth was like Gerald's in a killing
rage.  She sprang to her feet with an incoherent cry which made the
hum of voices in the next room cease suddenly.  Swift as a panther,
Rhett was beside her, his heavy hand across her mouth, his arm
tight about her waist.  She struggled against him madly, trying to
bite his hand, to kick his legs, to scream her rage, despair, hate,
her agony of broken pride.  She bent and twisted every way against
the iron of his arm, her heart near bursting, her tight stays
cutting off her breath.  He held her so tightly, so roughly that it
hurt and the hand over her mouth pinched into her jaws cruelly.
His face was white under its tan, his eyes hard and anxious as he
lifted her completely off her feet, swung her up against his chest
and sat down in the chair, holding her writhing in his lap.

"Darling, for God's sake!  Stop!  Hush!  Don't yell.  They'll be in
here in a minute if you do.  Do calm yourself.  Do you want the
Yankees to see you like this?"

She was beyond caring who saw her, beyond anything except a fiery
desire to kill him, but dizziness was sweeping her.  She could not
breathe; he was choking her; her stays were like a swiftly
compressing band of iron; his arms about her made her shake with
helpless hate and fury.  Then his voice became thin and dim and his
face above her swirled in a sickening mist which became heavier and
heavier until she no longer saw him--or anything else.

When she made feeble swimming motions to come back to consciousness,
she was tired to her bones, weak, bewildered.  She was lying back in
the chair, her bonnet off, Rhett was slapping her wrist, his black
eyes searching her face anxiously.  The nice young captain was
trying to pour a glass of brandy into her mouth and had spilled it
down her neck.  The other officers hovered helplessly about,
whispering and waving their hands.

"I--guess I must have fainted," she said, and her voice sounded so
far away it frightened her.

"Drink this," said Rhett, taking the glass and pushing it against
her lips.  Now she remembered and glared feebly at him but she was
too tired for anger.

"Please, for my sake."

She gulped and choked and began coughing but he pushed it to her
mouth again.  She swallowed deeply and the hot liquid burned
suddenly in her throat.

"I think she's better now, gentlemen," said Rhett, "and I thank you
very much.  The realization that I'm to be executed was too much
for her."

The group in blue shuffled their feet and looked embarrassed and
after several clearings of throats, they tramped out.  The young
captain paused in the doorway.

"If there's anything more I can do--"

"No, thank you."

He went out, closing the door behind him.

"Drink some more," said Rhett.

"No."

"Drink it."

She swallowed another mouthful and the warmth began spreading
through her body and strength flowed slowly back into her shaking
legs.  She pushed away the glass and tried to rise but he pressed
her back.

"Take your hands off me.  I'm going."

"Not yet.  Wait a minute.  You might faint again."

"I'd rather faint in the road than be here with you."

"Just the same, I won't have you fainting in the road."

"Let me go.  I hate you."

A faint smile came back to his face at her words.

"That sounds more like you.  You must be feeling better."

She lay relaxed for a moment, trying to summon anger to her aid,
trying to draw on her strength.  But she was too tired.  She was
too tired to hate or to care very much about anything.  Defeat lay
on her spirit like lead.  She had gambled everything and lost
everything.  Not even pride was left.  This was the dead end of her
last hope.  This was the end of Tara, the end of them all.  For a
long time she lay back with her eyes closed, hearing his heavy
breathing near her, and the glow of the brandy crept gradually over
her, giving a false strength and warmth.  When finally she opened
her eyes and looked him in the face, anger had roused again.  As
her slanting eyebrows rushed down together in a frown Rhett's old
smile came back.

"Now you are better.  I can tell it by your scowl."

"Of course, I'm all right.  Rhett Butler, you are hateful, a skunk,
if ever I saw one!  You knew very well what I was going to say as
soon as I started talking and you knew you weren't going to give me
the money.  And yet you let me go right on.  You could have spared
me--"

"Spared you and missed hearing all that?  Not much.  I have so few
diversions here.  I don't know when I've ever heard anything so
gratifying."  He laughed his sudden mocking laugh.  At the sound
she leaped to her feet, snatching up her bonnet.

He suddenly had her by the shoulders.

"Not quite yet.  Do you feel well enough to talk sense?"

"Let me go!"

"You are well enough, I see.  Then, tell me this.  Was I the only
iron you had in the fire?"  His eyes were keen and alert, watching
every change in her face.

"What do you mean?"

"Was I the only man you were going to try this on?"

"Is that any of your business?"

"More than you realize.  Are there any other men on your string?
Tell me!"

"No."

"Incredible.  I can't imagine you without five or six in reserve.
Surely someone will turn up to accept your interesting proposition.
I feel so sure of it that I want to give you a little advice."

"I don't want your advice."

"Nevertheless I will give it.  Advice seems to be the only thing I
can give you at present.  Listen to it, for it's good advice.  When
you are trying to get something out of a man, don't blurt it out as
you did to me.  Do try to be more subtle, more seductive.  It gets
better results.  You used to know how, to perfection.  But just now
when you offered me your--er--collateral for my money you looked as
hard as nails.  I've seen eyes like yours above a dueling pistol
twenty paces from me and they aren't a pleasant sight.  They evoke
no ardor in the male breast.  That's no way to handle men, my dear.
You are forgetting your early training."

"I don't need you to tell me how to behave," she said and wearily
put on her bonnet.  She wondered how he could jest so blithely with
a rope about his neck and her pitiful circumstances before him.
She did not even notice that his hands were jammed in his pockets
in hard fists as if he were straining at his own impotence.

"Cheer up," he said, as she tied the bonnet strings.  "You can come
to my hanging and it will make you feel lots better.  It'll even up
all your old scores with me--even this one.  And I'll mention you
in my will."

"Thank you, but they may not hang you till it's too late to pay the
taxes," she said with a sudden malice that matched his own, and she
meant it.



CHAPTER XXXV


It was raining when she came out of the building and the sky was a
dull putty color.  The soldiers on the square had taken shelter in
their huts and the streets were deserted.  There was no vehicle in
sight and she knew she would have to walk the long way home.

The brandy glow faded as she trudged along.  The cold wind made her
shiver and the chilly needle-like drops drove hard into her face.
The rain quickly penetrated Aunt Pitty's thin cloak until it hung
in clammy folds about her.  She knew the velvet dress was being
ruined and as for the tail feathers on the bonnet, they were as
drooping and draggled as when their former owner had worn them
about the wet barn yard of Tara.  The bricks of the sidewalk were
broken and, for long stretches, completely gone.  In these spots
the mud was ankle deep and her slippers stuck in it as if it were
glue, even coming completely off her feet.  Every time she bent
over to retrieve them, the hem of the dress fell in the mud.  She
did not even try to avoid puddles but stepped dully into them,
dragging her heavy skirts after her.  She could feel her wet
petticoat and pantalets cold about her ankles, but she was beyond
caring about the wreck of the costume on which she had gambled so
much.  She was chilled and disheartened and desperate.

How could she ever go back to Tara and face them after her brave
words?  How could she tell them they must all go--somewhere?  How
could she leave it all, the red fields, the tall pines, the dark
swampy bottom lands, the quiet burying ground where Ellen lay in
the cedars' deep shade?

Hatred of Rhett burned in her heart as she plodded along the
slippery way.  What a blackguard he was!  She hoped they did hang
him, so she would never have to face him again with his knowledge
of her disgrace and her humiliation.  Of course, he could have
gotten the money for her if he'd wanted to get it.  Oh, hanging was
too good for him!  Thank God, he couldn't see her now, with her
clothes soaking wet and her hair straggling and her teeth
chattering.  How hideous she must look and how he would laugh!

The negroes she passed turned insolent grins at her and laughed
among themselves as she hurried by, slipping and sliding in the
mud, stopping, panting to replace her slippers.  How dared they
laugh, the black apes!  How dared they grin at her, Scarlett O'Hara
of Tara!  She'd like to have them all whipped until the blood ran
down their backs.  What devils the Yankees were to set them free,
free to jeer at white people!

As she walked down Washington Street, the landscape was as dreary
as her own heart.  Here there was none of the bustle and
cheerfulness which she had noted on Peachtree Street.  Here many
handsome homes had once stood, but few of them had been rebuilt.
Smoked foundations and the lonesone blackened chimneys, now known
as "Sherman's Sentinels," appeared with disheartening frequency.
Overgrown paths led to what had been houses--old lawns thick with
dead weeds, carriage blocks bearing names she knew so well,
hitching posts which would never again know the knot of reins.
Cold wind and rain, mud and bare trees, silence and desolation.
How wet her feet were and how long the journey home!

She heard the splash of hooves behind her and moved farther over on
the narrow sidewalk to avoid more mud splotches on Aunt Pittypat's
cloak.  A horse and buggy came slowly up the road and she turned to
watch it, determined to beg a ride if the driver was a white
person.  The rain obscured her vision as the buggy came abreast,
but she saw the driver peer over the tarpaulin that stretched from
the dashboard to his chin.  There was something familiar about his
face and as she stepped out into the road to get a closer view,
there was an embarrassed little cough from the man and a well-known
voice cried in accents of pleasure and astonishment:  "Surely, it
can't be Miss Scarlett!"

"Oh, Mr. Kennedy!" she cried, splashing across the road and leaning
on the muddy wheel, heedless of further damage to the cloak.  "I
was never so glad to see anybody in my life!"

He colored with pleasure at the obvious sincerity of her words,
hastily squirted a stream of tobacco juice from the opposite side
of the buggy and leaped spryly to the ground.  He shook her hand
enthusiastically and holding up the tarpaulin, assisted her into
the buggy.

"Miss Scarlett, what are you doing over in this section by
yourself?  Don't you know it's dangerous these days?  And you are
soaking wet.  Here, wrap the robe around your feet."

As he fussed over her, clucking like a hen, she gave herself up to
the luxury of being taken care of.  It was nice to have a man
fussing and clucking and scolding, even if it was only that old
maid in pants, Frank Kennedy.  It was especially soothing after
Rhett's brutal treatment.  And oh, how good to see a County face
when she was so far from home!  He was well dressed, she noticed,
and the buggy was new too.  The horse looked young and well fed,
but Frank looked far older than his years, older than on that
Christmas eve when he had been at Tara with his men.  He was thin
and sallow faced and his yellow eyes were watery and sunken in
creases of loose flesh.  His ginger-colored beard was scantier than
ever, streaked with tobacco juice and as ragged as if he clawed at
it incessantly.  But he looked bright and cheerful, in contrast
with the lines of sorrow and worry and weariness which Scarlett saw
in faces everywhere.

"It's a pleasure to see you," said Frank warmly.  "I didn't know
you were in town.  I saw Miss Pittypat only last week and she
didn't tell me you were coming.  Did--er--ahem--did anyone else
come up from Tara with you?"

He was thinking of Suellen, the silly old fool.

"No," she said, wrapping the warm lap robe about her and trying to
pull it up around her neck.  "I came alone.  I didn't give Aunt
Pitty any warning."

He chirruped to the horse and it plodded off, picking its way
carefully down the slick road.

"All the folks at Tara well?"

"Oh, yes, so-so."

She must think of something to talk about, yet it was so hard to
talk.  Her mind was leaden with defeat and all she wanted was to
lie back in this warm blanket and say to herself:  "I won't think
of Tara now.  I'll think of it later, when it won't hurt so much."
If she could just get him started talking on some subject which
would hold him all the way home, so she would have nothing to do
but murmur "How nice" and "You certainly are smart" at intervals.

"Mr. Kennedy, I'm so surprised to see you.  I know I've been a bad
girl, not keeping up with old friends, but I didn't know you were
here in Atlanta.  I thought somebody told me you were in Marietta."

"I do business in Marietta, a lot of business," he said.  "Didn't
Miss Suellen tell you I had settled in Atlanta?  Didn't she tell
you about my store?"

Vaguely she had a memory of Suellen chattering about Frank and a
store but she never paid much heed to anything Suellen said.  It
had been sufficient to know that Frank was alive and would some day
take Suellen off her hands.

"No, not a word," she lied.  "Have you a store?  How smart you must
be!"

He looked a little hurt at hearing that Suellen had not published
the news but brightened at the flattery.

"Yes, I've got a store, and a pretty good one I think.  Folks tell
me I'm a born merchant."

He laughed pleasedly, the tittery cackling laugh which she always
found so annoying.

Conceited old fool, she thought.

"Oh, you could be a success at anything you turned your hand to,
Mr. Kennedy.  But how on earth did you ever get started with the
store?  When I saw you Christmas before last you said you didn't
have a cent in the world."

He cleared his throat raspingly, clawed at his whiskers and smiled
his nervous timid smile.

"Well, it's a long story, Miss Scarlett."

Thank the Lord! she thought.  Perhaps it will hold him till we get
home.  And aloud:  "Do tell!"

"You recall when we came to Tara last, hunting for supplies?  Well,
not long after that I went into active service.  I mean real
fighting.  No more commissary for me.  There wasn't much need for a
commissary, Miss Scarlett, because we couldn't hardly pick up a
thing for the army, and I thought the place for an able-bodied man
was in the fighting line.  Well, I fought along with the cavalry
for a spell till I got a minie ball through the shoulder."

He looked very proud and Scarlett said:  "How dreadful!"

"Oh, it wasn't so bad, just a flesh wound," he said deprecatingly.
"I was sent down south to a hospital and when I was just about
well, the Yankee raiders came through.  My, my, but that was a hot
time!  We didn't have much warning and all of us who could walk
helped haul out the army stores and the hospital equipment to the
train tracks to move it.  We'd gotten one train about loaded when
the Yankees rode in one end of town and out we went the other end
as fast as we could go.  My, my, that was a mighty sad sight,
sitting on top of that train and seeing the Yankees burn those
supplies we had to leave at the depot.  Miss Scarlett, they burned
about a half-mile of stuff we had piled up there along the tracks.
We just did get away ourselves."

"How dreadful!"

"Yes, that's the word.  Dreadful.  Our men had come back into
Atlanta then and so our train was sent here.  Well, Miss Scarlett,
it wasn't long before the war was over and--well, there was a lot
of china and cots and mattresses and blankets and nobody claiming
them.  I suppose rightfully they belonged to the Yankees.  I think
those were the terms of the surrender, weren't they?"

"Um," said Scarlett absently.  She was getting warmer now and a
little drowsy.

"I don't know till now if I did right," he said, a little
querulously.  "But the way I figured it, all that stuff wouldn't do
the Yankees a bit of good.  They'd probably burn it.  And our folks
had paid good solid money for it, and I thought it still ought to
belong to the Confederacy or to the Confederates.  Do you see what
I mean?"

"Um."

"I'm glad you agree with me, Miss Scarlett.  In a way, it's been on
my conscience.  Lots of folks have told me:  'Oh, forget about it,
Frank,' but I can't.  I couldn't hold up my head if I thought I'd
done what wasn't right.  Do you think I did right?"

"Of course," she said, wondering what the old fool had been talking
about.  Some struggle with his conscience.  When a man got as old
as Frank Kennedy he ought to have learned not to bother about
things that didn't matter.  But he always was so nervous and fussy
and old maidish.

"I'm glad to hear you say it.  After the surrender I had about ten
dollars in silver and nothing else in the world.  You know what
they did to Jonesboro and my house and store there.  I just didn't
know what to do.  But I used the ten dollars to put a roof on an
old store down by Five Points and I moved the hospital equipment in
and started selling it.  Everybody needed beds and china and
mattresses and I sold them cheap, because I figured it was about as
much other folks' stuff as it was mine.  But I cleared money on it
and bought some more stuff and the store just went along fine.  I
think I'll make a lot of money on it if things pick up."

At the word "money," her mind came back to him, crystal clear.

"You say you've made money?"

He visibly expanded under her interest.  Few women except Suellen
had ever given him more than perfunctory courtesy and it was very
flattering to have a former belle like Scarlett hanging on his
words.  He slowed the horse so they would not reach home before he
had finished his story.

"I'm not a millionaire, Miss Scarlett, and considering the money I
used to have, what I've got now sounds small.  But I made a
thousand dollars this year.  Of course, five hundred of it went to
paying for new stock and repairing the store and paying the rent.
But I've made five hundred clear and as things are certainly
picking up, I ought to clear two thousand next year.  I can sure
use it, too, for you see, I've got another iron in the fire."

Interest had sprung up sharply in her at the talk of money.  She
veiled her eyes with thick bristly lashes and moved a little closer
to him.

"What does that mean, Mr. Kennedy?"

He laughed and slapped the reins against the horse's back.

"I guess I'm boring you, talking about business, Miss Scarlett.  A
pretty little woman like you doesn't need to know anything about
business."

The old fool.

"Oh, I know I'm a goose about business but I'm so interested!
Please tell me all about it and you can explain what I don't
understand."

"Well, my other iron is a sawmill."

"A what?"

"A mill to cut up lumber and plane it.  I haven't bought it yet but
I'm going to.  There's a man named Johnson who has one, way out
Peachtree road, and he's anxious to sell it.  He needs some cash
right away, so he wants to sell and stay and run it for me at a
weekly wage.  It's one of the few mills in this section, Miss
Scarlett.  The Yankees destroyed most of them.  And anyone who owns
a sawmill owns a gold mine, for nowadays you can ask your own price
for lumber.  The Yankees burned so many houses here and there
aren't enough for people to live in and it looks like folks have
gone crazy about rebuilding.  They can't get enough lumber and they
can't get it fast enough.  People are just pouring into Atlanta
now, all the folks from the country districts who can't make a go
of farming without darkies and the Yankees and Carpetbaggers who
are swarming in trying to pick our bones a little barer than they
already are.  I tell you Atlanta's going to be a big town soon.
They've got to have lumber for their houses, so I'm going to buy
this mill just as soon as--well, as soon as some of the bills owing
me are paid.  By this time next year, I ought to be breathing
easier about money.  I--I guess you know why I'm so anxious to make
money quickly, don't you?"

He blushed and cackled again.  He's thinking of Suellen, Scarlett
thought in disgust.

For a moment she considered asking him to lend her three hundred
dollars, but wearily she rejected the idea.  He would be
embarrassed; he would stammer; he would offer excuses, but he
wouldn't lend it to her.  He had worked hard for it, so he could
marry Suellen in the spring and if he parted with it, his wedding
would be postponed indefinitely.  Even if she worked on his
sympathies and his duty toward his future family and gained his
promise of a loan, she knew Suellen would never permit it.  Suellen
was getting more and more worried over the fact that she was
practically an old maid and she would move heaven and earth to
prevent anything from delaying her marriage.

What was there in that whining complaining girl to make this old
fool so anxious to give her a soft nest?  Suellen didn't deserve a
loving husband and the profits of a store and a sawmill.  The
minute Sue got her hands on a little money she'd give herself
unendurable airs and never contribute one cent toward the upkeep of
Tara.  Not Suellen!  She'd think herself well out of it and not
care if Tara went for taxes or burned to the ground, so long as she
had pretty clothes and a "Mrs." in front of her name.

As Scarlett thought of Suellen's secure future and the precarious
one of herself and Tara, anger flamed in her at the unfairness of
life.  Hastily she looked out of the buggy into the muddy street,
lest Frank should see her expression.  She was going to lose
everything she had, while Sue--  Suddenly a determination was born
in her.

Suellen should not have Frank and his store and his mill!

Suellen didn't deserve them.  She was going to have them herself.
She thought of Tara and remembered Jonas Wilkerson, venomous as a
rattler, at the foot of the front steps, and she grasped at the
last straw floating above the shipwreck of her life.  Rhett had
failed her but the Lord had provided Frank.

But can I get him?  Her fingers clenched as she looked unseeingly
into the rain.  Can I make him forget Sue and propose to me real
quick?  If I could make Rhett almost propose, I know I could get
Frank!  Her eyes went over him, her lids flickering.  Certainly,
he's no beauty, she thought coolly, and he's got very bad teeth and
his breath smells bad and he's old enough to be my father.
Moreover, he's nervous and timid and well meaning, and I don't know
of any more damning qualities a man can have.  But at least, he's a
gentleman and I believe I could stand living with him better than
with Rhett.  Certainly I could manage him easier.  At any rate,
beggars can't be choosers.

That he was Suellen's fiance caused her no qualm of conscience.
After the complete moral collapse which had sent her to Atlanta and
to Rhett, the appropriation of her sister's betrothed seemed a
minor affair and one not to be bothered with at this time.

With the rousing of fresh hope, her spine stiffened and she forgot
that her feet were wet and cold.  She looked at Frank so steadily,
her eyes narrowing, that he became somewhat alarmed and she dropped
her gaze swiftly, remembering Rhett's words:  "I've seen eyes like
yours above a dueling pistol. . . .  They evoke no ardor in the
male breast."

"What's the matter, Miss Scarlett?  You got a chill?"

"Yes," she answered helplessly.  "Would you mind--"  She hesitated
timidly.  "Would you mind if I put my hand in your coat pocket?
It's so cold and my muff is soaked through."

"Why--why--of course not!  And you haven't any gloves!  My, my,
what a brute I've been idling along like this, talking my head off
when you must be freezing and wanting to get to a fire.  Giddap,
Sally!  By the way, Miss Scarlett, I've been so busy talking about
myself I haven't even asked you what you were doing in this section
in this weather?"

"I was at the Yankee headquarters," she answered before she
thought.  His sandy brows went up in astonishment.

"But Miss Scarlett!  The soldiers--  Why--"

"Mary, Mother of God, let me think of a real good lie," she prayed
hastily.  It would never do for Frank to suspect she had seen
Rhett.  Frank thought Rhett the blackest of blackguards and unsafe
for decent women to speak to.

"I went there--I went there to see if--if any of the officers would
buy fancy work from me to send home to their wives.  I embroider
very nicely."

He sank back against the seat aghast, indignation struggling with
bewilderment.

"You went to the Yankees--  But Miss Scarlett!  You shouldn't.
Why--why . . .  Surely your father doesn't know!  Surely, Miss
Pittypat--"

"Oh, I shall die if you tell Aunt Pittypat!" she cried in real
anxiety and burst into tears.  It was easy to cry, because she was
so cold and miserable, but the effect was startling.  Frank could
not have been more embarrassed or helpless if she had suddenly
begun disrobing.  He clicked his tongue against his teeth several
times, muttering "My! My!" and made futile gestures at her.  A
daring thought went through his mind that he should draw her head
onto his shoulder and pat her but he had never done this to any
woman and hardly knew how to go about it.  Scarlett O'Hara, so high
spirited and pretty, crying here in his buggy.  Scarlett O'Hara,
the proudest of the proud, trying to sell needlework to the
Yankees.  His heart burned.

She sobbed on, saying a few words now and then, and he gathered
that all was not well at Tara.  Mr. O'Hara was still "not himself
at all," and there wasn't enough food to go around for so many.  So
she had to come to Atlanta to try to make a little money for
herself and her boy.  Frank clicked his tongue again and suddenly
he found that her head was on his shoulder.  He did not quite know
how it got there.  Surely he had not placed it there, but there her
head was and there was Scarlett helplessly sobbing against his thin
chest, an exciting and novel sensation for him.  He patted her
shoulder timidly, gingerly at first, and when she did not rebuff
him he became bolder and patted her firmly.  What a helpless,
sweet, womanly little thing she was.  And how brave and silly to
try her hand at making money by her needle.  But dealing with the
Yankees--that was too much.

"I won't tell Miss Pittypat, but you must promise me, Miss
Scarlett, that you won't do anything like this again.  The idea of
your father's daughter--"

Her wet green eyes sought his helplessly.

"But, Mr. Kennedy, I must do something.  I must take care of my
poor little boy and there is no one to look after us now."

"You are a brave little woman," he pronounced, "but I won't have
you do this sort of thing.  Your family would die of shame."

"Then what will I do?"  The swimming eyes looked up to him as if
she knew he knew everything and was hanging on his words.

"Well, I don't know right now.  But I'll think of something."

"Oh, I know you will!  You are so smart--Frank."

She had never called him by his first name before and the sound
came to him as a pleasant shock and surprise.  The poor girl was
probably so upset she didn't even notice her slip.  He felt very
kindly toward her and very protecting.  If there was anything he
could do for Suellen O'Hara's sister, he would certainly do it.  He
pulled out a red bandanna handkerchief and handed it to her and she
wiped her eyes and began to smile tremulously.

"I'm such a silly little goose," she said apologetically.  "Please
forgive me."

"You aren't a silly little goose.  You're a very brave little woman
and you are trying to carry to heavy a load.  I'm afraid Miss
Pittypat isn't going to be much help to you.  I hear she lost most
of her property and Mr. Henry Hamilton's in bad shape himself.  I
only wish I had a home to offer you shelter in.  But, Miss
Scarlett, you just remember this, when Miss Suellen and I are
married, there'll always be a place for you under our roof and for
Wade Hampton too."

Now was the time!  Surely the saints and angels watched over her to
give her such a Heaven-sent opportunity.  She managed to look very
startled and embarrassed and opened her mouth as if to speak
quickly and then shut it with a pop.

"Don't tell me you didn't know I was to be your brother-in-law this
spring," he said with nervous jocularity.

And then, seeing her eyes fill up with tears, he questioned in
alarm:  "What's the matter?  Miss Sue's not ill, is she?"

"Oh, no!  No!"

"There is something wrong.  You must tell me."

"Oh, I can't!  I didn't know!  I thought surely she must have
written you--  Oh, how mean!"

"Miss Scarlett, what is it?"

"Oh, Frank, I didn't mean to let it out but I thought, of course,
you knew--that she had written you--"

"Written me what?"  He was trembling.

"Oh, to do this to a fine man like you!"

"What's she done?"

"She didn't write you?  Oh, I guess she was too ashamed to write
you.  She should be ashamed!  Oh, to have such a mean sister!"

By this time, Frank could not even get questions to his lips.  He
sat staring at her, gray faced, the reins slack in his hands.

"She's going to marry Tony Fontaine next month.  Oh, I'm so sorry,
Frank.  So sorry to be the one to tell you.  She just got tired of
waiting and she was afraid she'd be an old maid."



Mammy was standing on the front porch when Frank helped Scarlett
out of the buggy.  She had evidently been standing there for some
time, for her head rag was damp and the old shawl clutched tightly
about her showed rain spots.  Her wrinkled black face was a study
in anger and apprehension and her lip was pushed out farther than
Scarlett could ever remember.  She peered quickly at Frank and,
when she saw who it was, her face changed--pleasure, bewilderment
and something akin to guilt spreading over it.  She waddled forward
to Frank with pleased greetings and grinned and curtsied when he
shook her hand.

"It sho is good ter see home folks," she said.  "How is you, Mist'
Frank?  My, ain' you lookin' fine an' gran'!  Effen Ah'd knowed
Miss Scarlett wuz out wid you, Ah wouldn' worrit so.  Ah'd knowed
she wuz tekken keer of.  Ah come back hyah an' fine she gone an' Ah
been as 'stracted as a chicken wid its haid off, thinkin' she
runnin' roun' dis town by herseff wid all dese trashy free issue
niggers on de street.  Huccome you din' tell me you gwine out,
honey?  An' you wid a cole!"

Scarlett winked slyly at Frank and, for all his distress at the bad
news he had just heard, he smiled, knowing she was enjoining
silence and making him one in a pleasant conspiracy.

"You run up and fix me some dry clothes, Mammy," she said.  "And
some hot tea."

"Lawd, yo' new dress is plum ruint," grumbled Mammy.  "Ah gwine
have a time dryin' it an' brushin' it, so it'll be fit ter be wo'
ter de weddin' ternight."

She went into the house and Scarlett leaned close to Frank and
whispered:  "Do come to supper tonight.  We are so lonesome.  And
we're going to the wedding afterward.  Do be our escort!  And,
please don't say anything to Aunt Pitty about--about Suellen.  It
would distress her so much and I can't bear for her to know that my
sister--"

"Oh, I won't!  I won't!" Frank said hastily, wincing from the very
thought.

"You've been so sweet to me today and done me so much good.  I feel
right brave again."  She squeezed his hand in parting and turned
the full battery of her eyes upon him.

Mammy, who was waiting just inside the door, gave her an inscrutable
look and followed her, puffing, up the stairs to the bedroom.  She
was silent while she stripped off the wet clothes and hung them over
chairs and tucked Scarlett into bed.  When she had brought up a cup
of hot tea and a hot brick, rolled in flannel, she looked down at
Scarlett and said, with the nearest approach to an apology in her
voice Scarlett had ever heard:  "Lamb, huccome you din' tell yo' own
Mammy whut you wuz upter?  Den Ah wouldn' had ter traipse all dis
way up hyah ter 'Lanta.  Ah is too ole an' too fat fer sech runnin'
roun'."

"What do you mean?"

"Honey, you kain fool me.  Ah knows you.  An' Ah seed Mist' Frank's
face jes' now an' Ah seed yo' face, an' Ah kin read yo' mine lak a
pahson read a Bible.  An' Ah heerd dat whisperin' you wuz givin'
him 'bout Miss Suellen.  Effen Ah'd had a notion 'twuz Mist' Frank
you wuz affer, Ah'd stayed home whar Ah b'longs."

"Well," said Scarlett shortly, snuggling under the blankets and
realizing it was useless to try to throw Mammy off the scent, "who
did you think it was?"

"Chile, Ah din' know but Ah din' lak de look on yo' face yestiddy.
An' Ah 'membered Miss Pittypat writin' Miss Melly dat dat
rapscallion Butler man had lots of money an' Ah doan fergit whut Ah
hears.  But Mist' Frank, he a gempmum even ef he ain' so pretty."

Scarlett gave her a sharp look and Mammy returned the gaze with
calm omniscience.

"Well, what are you going to do about it?  Tattle to Suellen?"

"Ah is gwine ter he'p you pleasure Mist' Frank eve'y way Ah knows
how," said Mammy, tucking the covers about Scarlett's neck.

Scarlett lay quietly for a while, as Mammy fussed about the room,
relief flooding her that there was no need for words between them.
No explanations were asked, no reproaches made.  Mammy understood
and was silent.  In Mammy, Scarlett had found a realist more
uncompromising than herself.  The mottled wise old eyes saw deeply,
saw clearly, with the directness of the savage and the child,
undeterred by conscience when danger threatened her pet.  Scarlett
was her baby and what her baby wanted, even though it belonged to
another, Mammy was willing to help her obtain.  The rights of
Suellen and Frank Kennedy did not even enter her mind, save to
cause a grim inward chuckle.  Scarlett was in trouble and doing the
best she could, and Scarlett was Miss Ellen's child.  Mammy rallied
to her with never a moment's hesitation.

Scarlett felt the silent reinforcement and, as the hot brick at her
feet warmed her, the hope which had flickered faintly on the cold
ride home grew into a flame.  It swept through her, making her
heart pump the blood through her veins in pounding surges.
Strength was coming back and a reckless excitement which made her
want to laugh aloud.  Not beaten yet, she thought exultantly.

"Hand me the mirror, Mammy," she said.

"Keep yo' shoulders unner dat kivver," ordered Mammy, passing the
hand mirror to her, a smile on her thick lips.

Scarlett looked at herself.

"I look white as a hant," she said, "and my hair is as wild as a
horse's tail."

"You doan look peart as you mout."

"Hum. . . .  Is it raining very hard?"

"You know it's po'in'."

"Well, just the same, you've got to go downtown for me."

"Not in dis rain, Ah ain'."

"Yes, you are or I'll go myself."

"Whut you got ter do dat woan wait?  Look ter me lak you done nuff
fer one day."

"I want," said Scarlett, surveying herself carefully in the mirror,
"a bottle of cologne water.  You can wash my hair and rinse it with
cologne.  And buy me a jar of quince-seed jelly to make it lie down
flat."

"Ah ain' gwine wash yo' ha'r in dis wedder an' you ain' gwine put
no cologne on yo' haid lak a fas' woman needer.  Not w'ile Ah got
breaf in mah body."

"Oh, yes, I am.  Look in my purse and get that five-dollar gold
piece out and go to town.  And--er, Mammy, while you are downtown,
you might get me a--a pot of rouge."

"Whut dat?" asked Mammy suspiciously.

Scarlett met her eyes with a coldness she was far from feeling.
There was never any way of knowing just how far Mammy could be
bullied.

"Never you mind.  Just ask for it."

"Ah ain' buyin nuthin' dat Ah doan know whut 'tis."

"Well, it's paint, if you're so curious!  Face paint.  Don't stand
there and swell up like a toad.  Go on."

"Paint!" ejaculated Mammy.  "Face paint!  Well, you ain' so big dat
Ah kain whup you!  Ah ain' never been so scan'lized!  You is los'
yo' mine!  Miss Ellen be tuhnin' in her grabe dis minute!  Paintin'
yo face lak a--"

"You know very well Grandma Robillard painted her face and--"

"Yas'm, an' wo' only one petticoat an' it wrang out wid water ter
mek it stick an' show de shape of her laigs, but dat ain' sayin'
you is gwine do sumpin' lak dat!  Times wuz scan'lous w'en Ole Miss
wuz young but times changes, dey do an'--"

"Name of God!" cried Scarlett, losing her temper and throwing back
the covers.  "You can go straight back to Tara!"

"You kain sen' me ter Tara ness Ah wants ter go.  Ah is free," said
Mammy heatedly.  "An' Ah is gwine ter stay right hyah.  Git back in
dat baid.  Does you want ter ketch pneumony jes' now?  Put down dem
stays!  Put dem down, honey.  Now, Miss Scarlett, you ain' gwine
nowhars in dis wedder.  Lawd God!  But you sho look lak yo' pa!
Git back in baid--Ah kain go buyin' no paint!  Ah die of shame,
eve'ybody knowin 'it wud fer mah chile!  Miss Scarlett, you is so
sweet an' pretty lookin' you doan need no paint.  Honey, doan
nobody but bad womens use dat stuff."

"Well, they get results, don't they?"

"Jesus, hear her!  Lamb, doan say bad things lak dat!  Put down dem
wet stockin's, honey.  Ah kain have you buy dat stuff yo'seff.
Miss Ellen would hant me.  Git back in baid.  Ah'll go.  Maybe Ah
fine me a sto' whar dey doan know us."



That night at Mrs. Elsing's, when Fanny had been duly married and
old Levi and the other musicians were tuning up for the dance,
Scarlett looked about her with gladness.  It was so exciting to be
actually at a party again.  She was pleased also with the warm
reception she had received.  When she entered the house on Frank's
arm, everyone had rushed to her with cries of pleasure and welcome,
kissed her, shaken her hand, told her they had missed her
dreadfully and that she must never go back to Tara.  The men seemed
gallantly to have forgotten she had tried her best to break their
hearts in other days and the girls that she had done everything in
her power to entice their beaux away from them.  Even Mrs.
Merriwether, Mrs. Whiting, Mrs. Meade and the other dowagers who
had been so cool to her during the last days of the war, forgot her
flighty conduct and their disapproval of it and recalled only that
she had suffered in their common defeat and that she was Pitty's
niece and Charles' widow.  They kissed her and spoke gently with
tears in their eyes of her dear mother's passing and asked at
length about her father and her sisters.  Everyone asked about
Melanie and Ashley, demanding the reason why they, too, had not
come back to Atlanta.

In spite of her pleasure at the welcome, Scarlett felt a slight
uneasiness which she tried to conceal, an uneasiness about the
appearance of her velvet dress.  It was still damp to the knees and
still spotted about the hem, despite the frantic efforts of Mammy
and Cookie with a steaming kettle, a clean hair brush and frantic
wavings in front of an open fire.  Scarlett was afraid someone
would notice her bedraggled state and realize that this was her
only nice dress.  She was a little cheered by the fact that many of
the dresses of the other guests looked far worse than hers.  They
were so old and had such carefully mended and pressed looks.  At
least, her dress was whole and new, damp though it was--in fact,
the only new dress at the gathering with the exception of Fanny's
white-satin wedding gown.

Remembering what Aunt Pitty had told her about the Elsing finances,
she wondered where the money for the satin dress had been obtained
and for the refreshments and decorations and musicians too.  It
must have cost a pretty penny.  Borrowed money probably or else the
whole Elsing clan had contributed to give Fanny this expensive
wedding.  Such a wedding in these hard times seemed to Scarlett an
extravagance on a par with the tombstones of the Tarleton boys and
she felt the same irritation and lack of sympathy she had felt as
she stood in the Tarleton burying ground.  The days when money
could be thrown away carelessly had passed.  Why did these people
persist in making the gestures of the old days when the old days
were gone?

But she shrugged off her momentary annoyance.  It wasn't her money
and she didn't want her evening's pleasure spoiled by irritation at
other people's foolishness.

She discovered she knew the groom quite well, for he was Tommy
Wellburn from Sparta and she had nursed him in 1863 when he had a
wound in his shoulder.  He had been a handsome young six-footer
then and had given up his medical studies to go in the cavalry.
Now he looked like a little old man, so bent was he by the wound in
his hip.  He walked with some difficulty and, as Aunt Pitty had
remarked, spraddled in a very vulgar way.  But he seemed totally
unaware of his appearance, or unconcerned about it, and had the
manner of one who asks no odds from any man.  He had given up all
hope of continuing his medical studies and was now a contractor,
working a labor crew of Irishmen who were building the new hotel.
Scarlett wondered how he managed so onerous a job in his condition
but asked no questions, realizing wryly that almost anything was
possible when necessity drove.

Tommy and Hugh Elsing and the little monkey-like Rene Picard stood
talking with her while the chairs and furniture were pushed back to
the wall in preparation for the dancing.  Hugh had not changed
since Scarlett last saw him in 1862.  He was still the thin
sensitive boy with the same lock of pale brown hair hanging over
his forehead and the same delicate useless-looking hands she
remembered so well.  But Rene had changed since that furlough when
he married Maybelle Merriwether.  He still had the Gallic twinkle
in his black eyes and the Creole zest for living but, for all his
easy laughter, there was something hard about his face which had
not been there in the early days of the war.  And the air of
supercilious elegance which had clung about him in his striking
Zouave uniform was completely gone.

"Cheeks lak ze rose, eyes lak ze emerald!" he said, kissing
Scarlett's hand and paying tribute to the rouge upon her face.
"Pretty lak w'en I first see you at ze bazaar.  You remembaire?
Nevaire have I forgot how you toss your wedding ring in my basket.
Ha, but zat was brave!  But I should nevaire have zink you wait so
long to get anothaire ring!"

His eyes sparkled wickedly and he dug his elbow into Hugh's ribs.

"And I never thought you'd be driving a pie wagon, Renny Picard,"
she said.  Instead of being ashamed at having his degrading
occupation thrown in his face, he seemed pleased and laughed
uproariously, slapping Hugh on the back.

"Touche!" he cried.  "Belle Mere, Madame Merriwether, she mek me do
eet, ze first work I do en all my life, Rene Picard, who was to
grow old breeding ze race horse, playing ze feedle!  Now, I drive
ze pie wagon and I lak eet!  Madame Belle Mere, she can mek a man
do annyzing.  She should have been ze general and we win ze war,
eh, Tommy?"

Well! thought Scarlett.  The idea of liking to drive a pie wagon
when his people used to own ten miles along the Mississippi River
and a big house in New Orleans, too!

"If we'd had our mothers-in-law in the ranks, we'd have beat the
Yankees in a week," agreed Tommy, his eyes straying to the slender,
indomitable form of his new mother-in-law.  "The only reason we
lasted as long as we did was because of the ladies behind us who
wouldn't give up."

"Who'll NEVER give up," amended Hugh, and his smile was proud but a
little wry.  "There's not a lady here tonight who has surrendered,
no matter what her men folks did at Appomattox.  It's a lot worse
on them than it ever was on us.  At least, we took it out in
fighting."

"And they in hating," finished Tommy.  "Eh, Scarlett?  It bothers
the ladies to see what their men folks have come down to lots more
than it bothers us.  Hugh was to be a judge, Rene was to play the
fiddle before the crowned heads of Europe--"  He ducked as Rene
aimed a blow at him.  "And I was to be a doctor and now--"

"Geeve us ze time!" cried Rene.  "Zen I become ze Pie Prince of ze
South!  And my good Hugh ze King of ze Kindling and you, my Tommy,
you weel own ze Irish slaves instead of ze darky slaves.  What
changes--what fun!  And what eet do for you, Mees Scarlett, and
Mees Melly?  You meelk ze cow, peek ze cotton?"

"Indeed, no!" said Scarlett coolly, unable to understand Rene's gay
acceptance of hardships.  "Our darkies do that."

"Mees Melly, I hear she call her boy 'Beauregard.'  You tell her I,
Rene, approve and say that except for 'Jesus' there is no bettaire
name."

And though he smiled, his eyes glowed proudly at the name of
Louisiana's dashing hero.

"Well, there's 'Robert Edward Lee,'" observed Tommy.  "And while
I'm not trying to lessen Old Beau's reputation, my first son is
going to be named 'Bob Lee Wellburn.'"

Rene laughed and shrugged.

"I recount to you a joke but eet eez a true story.  And you see how
Creoles zink of our brave Beauregard and of your General Lee.  On
ze train near New Orleans a man of Virginia, a man of General Lee,
he meet wiz a Creole of ze troops of Beauregard.  And ze man of
Virginia, he talk, talk, talk how General Lee do zis, General Lee
say zat.  And ze Creole, he look polite and he wreenkle hees
forehead lak he try to remembaire, and zen he smile and say:
'General Lee!  Ah, oui!  Now I know!  General Lee!  Ze man General
Beauregard speak well of!'"

Scarlett tried to join politely in the laughter but she did not see
any point to the story except that Creoles were just as stuck up as
Charleston and Savannah people.  Moreover, she had always thought
Ashley's son should have been named after him.

The musicians after preliminary tunings and whangings broke into
"Old Dan Tucker" and Tommy turned to her.

"Will you dance, Scarlett?  I can't favor you but Hugh or Rene--"

"No, thank you.  I'm still mourning my mother," said Scarlett
hastily.  "I will sit them out."

Her eyes singled out Frank Kennedy and beckoned him from the side
of Mrs. Elsing.

"I'll sit in that alcove yonder if you'll bring me some
refreshments and then we can have a nice chat," she told Frank as
the other three men moved off.

When he had hurried away to bring her a glass of wine and a paper
thin slice of cake, Scarlett sat down in the alcove at the end of
the drawing room and carefully arranged her skirts so that the
worst spots would not show.  The humiliating events of the morning
with Rhett were pushed from her mind by the excitement of seeing so
many people and hearing music again.  Tomorrow she would think of
Rhett's conduct and her shame and they would make her writhe again.
Tomorrow she would wonder if she had made any impression on Frank's
hurt and bewildered heart.  But not tonight.  Tonight she was alive
to her finger tips, every sense alert with hope, her eyes
sparkling.

She looked from the alcove into the huge drawing room and watched
the dancers, remembering how beautiful this room had been when
first she came to Atlanta during the war.  Then the hardwood floors
had shone like glass, and overhead the chandelier with its hundreds
of tiny prisms had caught and reflected every ray of the dozens of
candles it bore, flinging them, like gleams from diamonds, flame
and sapphire about the room.  The old portraits on the walls had
been dignified and gracious and had looked down upon guests with an
air of mellowed hospitality.  The rosewood sofas had been soft and
inviting and one of them, the largest, had stood in the place of
honor in this same alcove where she now sat.  It had been
Scarlett's favorite seat at parties.  From this point stretched the
pleasant vista of drawing room and dining room beyond, the oval
mahogany table which seated twenty and the twenty slim-legged
chairs demurely against the walls, the massive sideboard and buffet
weighted with heavy silver, with seven-branched candlesticks,
goblets, cruets, decanters and shining little glasses.  Scarlett
had sat on that sofa so often in the first years of the war, always
with some handsome officer beside her, and listened to violin and
bull fiddle, accordion and banjo, and heard the exciting swishing
noises which dancing feet made on the waxed and polished floor.

Now the chandelier hung dark.  It was twisted askew and most of the
prisms were broken, as if the Yankee occupants had made their
beauty a target for their boots.  Now an oil lamp and a few candles
lighted the room and the roaring fire in the wide hearth gave most
of the illumination.  Its flickering light showed how irreparably
scarred and splintered the dull old floor was.  Squares on the
faded paper on the wall gave evidence that once the portraits had
hung there, and wide cracks in the plaster recalled the day during
the siege when a shell had exploded on the house and torn off parts
of the roof and second floor.  The heavy old mahogany table, spread
with cake and decanters, still presided in the empty-looking dining
room but it was scratched and the broken legs showed signs of
clumsy repair.  The sideboard, the silver and the spindly chairs
were gone.  The dull-gold damask draperies which had covered the
arching French windows at the back of the room were missing, and
only the remnants of the lace curtains remained, clean but
obviously mended.

In place of the curved sofa she had liked so much was a hard bench
that was none too comfortable.  She sat upon it with as good grace
as possible, wishing her skirts were in such condition that she
could dance.  It would be so good to dance again.  But, of course,
she could do more with Frank in this sequestered alcove than in a
breathless reel and she could listen fascinated to his talk and
encourage him to greater flights of foolishness.

But the music certainly was inviting.  Her slipper patted longingly
in time with old Levi's large splayed foot as he twanged a strident
banjo and called the figures of the reel.  Feet swished and scraped
and patted as the twin lines danced toward each other, retreated,
whirled and made arches of their arms.


"'Ole Dan Tucker he got drunk--'
  (Swing yo' padners!)
'Fell in de fiah' an' he kick up a chunk!'
  (Skip light, ladies!)"


After the dull and exhausting months at Tara it was good to hear
music again and the sound of dancing feet, good to see familiar
friendly faces laughing in the feeble light, calling old jokes and
catchwords, bantering, rallying, coquetting.  It was like coming to
life again after being dead.  It almost seemed that the bright days
of five years ago had come back again.  If she could close her eyes
and not see the worn made-over dresses and the patched boots and
mended slippers, if her mind did not call up the faces of boys
missing from the reel, she might almost think that nothing had
changed.  But as she looked, watching the old men grouped about the
decanter in the dining room, the matrons lining the walls, talking
behind fanless hands, and the swaying, skipping young dancers, it
came to her suddenly, coldly, frighteningly that it was all as
greatly changed as if these familiar figures were ghosts.

They looked the same but they were different.  What was it?  Was it
only that they were five years older?  No, it was something more
than the passing of time.  Something had gone out of them, out of
their world.  Five years ago, a feeling of security had wrapped
them all around so gently they were not even aware of it.  In its
shelter they had flowered.  Now it was gone and with it had gone
the old thrill, the old sense of something delightful and exciting
just around the corner, the old glamor of their way of living.

She knew she had changed too, but not as they had changed, and it
puzzled her.  She sat and watched them and she felt herself an
alien among them, as alien and lonely as if she had come from
another world, speaking a language they did not understand and she
not understanding theirs.  Then she knew that this feeling was the
same one she felt with Ashley.  With him and with people of his
kind--and they made up most of her world--she felt outside of
something she could not understand.

Their faces were little changed and their manners not at all but it
seemed to her that these two things were all that remained of her
old friends.  An ageless dignity, a timeless gallantry still clung
about them and would cling until they died but they would carry
undying bitterness to their graves, a bitterness too deep for
words.  They were a soft-spoken, fierce, tired people who were
defeated and would not know defeat, broken yet standing determinedly
erect.  They were crushed and helpless, citizens of conquered
provinces.  They were looking on the state they loved, seeing it
trampled by the enemy, rascals making a mock of the law, their
former slaves a menace, their men disfranchised, their women
insulted.  And they were remembering graves.

Everything in their old world had changed but the old forms.  The
old usages went on, must go on, for the forms were all that were
left to them.  They were holding tightly to the things they knew
best and loved best in the old days, the leisured manners, the
courtesy, the pleasant casualness in human contacts and, most of
all, the protecting attitude of the men toward their women.  True
to the tradition in which they had been reared, the men were
courteous and tender and they almost succeeded in creating an
atmosphere of sheltering their women from all that was harsh and
unfit for feminine eyes.  That, thought Scarlett, was the height of
absurdity, for there was little, now, which even the most
cloistered women had not seen and known in the last five years.
They had nursed the wounded, closed dying eyes, suffered war and
fire and devastation, known terror and flight and starvation.

But, no matter what sights they had seen, what menial tasks they
had done and would have to do, they remained ladies and gentlemen,
royalty in exile--bitter, aloof, incurious, kind to one another,
diamond hard, as bright and brittle as the crystals of the broken
chandelier over their heads.  The old days had gone but these
people would go their ways as if the old days still existed,
charming, leisurely, determined not to rush and scramble for
pennies as the Yankees did, determined to part with none of the old
ways.

Scarlett knew that she, too, was greatly changed.  Otherwise she
could not have done the things she had done since she was last in
Atlanta; otherwise she would not now be contemplating doing what
she desperately hoped to do.  But there was a difference in their
hardness and hers and just what the difference was, she could not,
for the moment, tell.  Perhaps it was that there was nothing she
would not do, and there were so many things these people would
rather die than do.  Perhaps it was that they were without hope but
still smiling at life, bowing gracefully and passing it by.  And
this Scarlett could not do.

She could not ignore life.  She had to live it and it was too
brutal, too hostile, for her even to try to gloss over its
harshness with a smile.  Of the sweetness and courage and
unyielding pride of her friends, Scarlett saw nothing.  She saw
only a silly stiff-neckedness which observed facts but smiled and
refused to look them in the face.

As she stared at the dancers, flushed from the reel, she wondered
if things drove them as she was driven, dead lovers, maimed
husbands, children who were hungry, acres slipping away, beloved
roofs that sheltered strangers.  But, of course, they were driven!
She knew their circumstances only a little less thoroughly than she
knew her own.  Their losses had been her losses, their privations
her privations, their problems her same problems.  Yet they had
reacted differently to them.  The faces she was seeing in the room
were not faces; they were masks, excellent masks which would never
drop.

But if they were suffering as acutely from brutal circumstances as
she was--and they were--how could they maintain this air of gaiety
and lightness of heart?  Why, indeed, should they even try to do
it?  They were beyond her comprehension and vaguely irritating.
She couldn't be like them.  She couldn't survey the wreck of the
world with an air of casual unconcern.  She was as hunted as a fox,
running with a bursting heart, trying to reach a burrow before the
hounds caught up.

Suddenly she hated them all because they were different from her,
because they carried their losses with an air that she could never
attain, would never wish to attain.  She hated them, these smiling,
light-footed strangers, these proud fools who took pride in
something they had lost, seeming to be proud that they had lost it.
The women bore themselves like ladies and she knew they were
ladies, though menial tasks were their daily lot and they didn't
know where their next dress was coming from.  Ladies all!  But she
could not feel herself a lady, for all her velvet dress and scented
hair, for all the pride of birth that stood behind her and the
pride of wealth that had once been hers.  Harsh contact with the
red earth of Tara had stripped gentility from her and she knew she
would never feel like a lady again until her table was weighted
with silver and crystal and smoking with rich food, until her own
horses and carriages stood in her stables, until black hands and
not white took the cotton from Tara.

"Ah!" she thought angrily, sucking in her breath.  "That's the
difference!  Even though they're poor, they still feel like ladies
and I don't.  The silly fools don't seem to realize that you can't
be a lady without money!"

Even in this flash of revelation, she realized vaguely that,
foolish though they seemed, theirs was the right attitude.  Ellen
would have thought so.  This disturbed her.  She knew she should
feel as these people felt, but she could not.  She knew she should
believe devoutly, as they did, that a born lady remained a lady,
even if reduced to poverty, but she could not make herself believe
it now.

All her life she had heard sneers hurled at the Yankees because
their pretensions to gentility were based on wealth, not breeding.
But at this moment, heresy though it was, she could not help
thinking the Yankees were right on this one matter, even if wrong
in all others.  It took money to be a lady.  She knew Ellen would
have fainted had she ever heard such words from her daughter.  No
depth of poverty could ever have made Ellen feel ashamed.  Ashamed!
Yes, that was how Scarlett felt.  Ashamed that she was poor and
reduced to galling shifts and penury and work that negroes should
do.

She shrugged in irritation.  Perhaps these people were right and
she was wrong but, just the same, these proud fools weren't looking
forward as she was doing, straining every nerve, risking even honor
and good name to get back what they had lost.  It was beneath the
dignity of any of them to indulge in a scramble for money.  The
times were rude and hard.  They called for rude and hard struggle
if one was to conquer them.  Scarlett knew that family tradition
would forcibly restrain many of these people from such a struggle--
with the making of money admittedly its aim.  They all thought that
obvious money-making and even talk of money were vulgar in the
extreme.  Of course, there were exceptions.  Mrs. Merriwether and
her baking and Rene driving the pie wagon.  And Hugh Elsing cutting
and peddling firewood and Tommy contracting.  And Frank having the
gumption to start a store.  But what of the rank and file of them?
The planters would scratch a few acres and live in poverty.  The
lawyers and doctors would go back to their professions and wait for
clients who might never come.  And the rest, those who had lived in
leisure on their incomes?  What would happen to them?

But she wasn't going to be poor all her life.  She wasn't going to
sit down and patiently wait for a miracle to help her.  She was
going to rush into life and wrest from it what she could.  Her
father had started as a poor immigrant boy and had won the broad
acres of Tara.  What he had done, his daughter could do.  She
wasn't like these people who had gambled everything on a Cause that
was gone and were content to be proud of having lost that Cause,
because it was worth any sacrifice.  They drew their courage from
the past.  She was drawing hers from the future.  Frank Kennedy, at
present, was her future.  At least, he had the store and he had
cash money.  And if she could only marry him and get her hands on
that money, she could make ends meet at Tara for another year.  And
after that--Frank must buy the sawmill.  She could see for herself
how quickly the town was rebuilding and anyone who could establish
a lumber business now, when there was so little competition, would
have a gold mine.

There came to her, from the recesses of her mind, words Rhett had
spoken in the early years of the war about the money he made in the
blockade.  She had not taken the trouble to understand them then,
but now they seemed perfectly clear and she wondered if it had been
only her youth or plain stupidity which had kept her from
appreciating them.

"There's just as much money to be made in the wreck of a
civilization as in the upbuilding of one."

"This is the wreck he foresaw," she thought, "and he was right.
There's still plenty of money to be made by anyone who isn't afraid
to work--or to grab."

She saw Frank coming across the floor toward her with a glass of
blackberry wine in his hand and a morsel of cake on a saucer and
she pulled her face into a smile.  It did not occur to her to
question whether Tara was worth marrying Frank.  She knew it was
worth it and she never gave the matter a second thought.

She smiled up at him as she sipped the wine, knowing that her
cheeks were more attractively pink than any of the dancers'.  She
moved her skirts for him to sit by her and waved her handkerchief
idly so that the faint sweet smell of the cologne could reach his
nose.  She was proud of the cologne, for no other woman in the room
was wearing any and Frank had noticed it.  In a fit of daring he
had whispered to her that she was as pink and fragrant as a rose.

If only he were not so shy!  He reminded her of a timid old brown
field rabbit.  If only he had the gallantry and ardor of the
Tarleton boys or even the coarse impudence of Rhett Butler.  But,
if he possessed those qualities, he'd probably have sense enough to
feel the desperation that lurked just beneath her demurely
fluttering eyelids.  As it was, he didn't know enough about women
even to suspect what she was up to.  That was her good fortune but
it did not increase her respect for him.



CHAPTER XXXVI


She married Frank Kennedy two weeks later after a whirlwind
courtship which she blushingly told him left her too breathless to
oppose his ardor any longer.

He did not know that during those two weeks she had walked the
floor at night, gritting her teeth at the slowness with which he
took hints and encouragements, praying that no untimely letter from
Suellen would reach him and ruin her plans.  She thanked God that
her sister was the poorest of correspondents, delighting to receive
letters and disliking to write them.  But there was always a
chance, always a chance, she thought in the long night hours as she
padded back and forth across the cold floor of her bedroom, with
Ellen's faded shawl clutched about her nightdress.  Frank did not
know she had received a laconic letter from Will, relating that
Jonas Wilkerson had paid another call at Tara and, finding her gone
to Atlanta, had stormed about until Will and Ashley threw him
bodily off the place.  Will's letter hammered into her mind the
fact she knew only too well--that time was getting shorter and
shorter before the extra taxes must be paid.  A fierce desperation
drove her as she saw the days slipping by and she wished she might
grasp the hourglass in her hands and keep the sands from running.

But so well did she conceal her feelings, so well did she enact her
role, Frank suspected nothing, saw no more than what lay on the
surface--the pretty and helpless young widow of Charles Hamilton
who greeted him every night in Miss Pittypat's parlor and listened,
breathless with admiration, as he told of future plans for his
store and how much money he expected to make when he was able to
buy the sawmill.  Her sweet sympathy and her bright-eyed interest
in every word he uttered were balm upon the wound left by Suellen's
supposed defection.  His heart was sore and bewildered at Suellen's
conduct and his vanity, the shy, touchy vanity of a middle-aged
bachelor who knows himself to be unattractive to women, was deeply
wounded.  He could not write Suellen, upbraiding her for her
faithlessness; he shrank from the very idea.  But he could ease his
heart by talking about her to Scarlett.  Without saying a disloyal
word about Suellen, she could tell him she understood how badly her
sister had treated him and what good treatment he merited from a
woman who really appreciated him.

Little Mrs. Hamilton was such a pretty pink-cheeked person,
alternating between melancholy sighs when she thought of her sad
plight, and laughter as gay and sweet as the tinkling of tiny
silver bells when he made small jokes to cheer her.  Her green
gown, now neatly cleaned by Mammy, showed off her slender figure
with its tiny waist to perfection, and how bewitching was the faint
fragrance which always clung about her handkerchief and her hair!
It was a shame that such a fine little woman should be alone and
helpless in a world so rough that she didn't even understand its
harshness.  No husband nor brother nor even a father now to protect
her.  Frank thought the world too rude a place for a lone woman
and, in that idea, Scarlett silently and heartily concurred.

He came to call every night, for the atmosphere of Pitty's house
was pleasant and soothing.  Mammy's smile at the front door was the
smile reserved for quality folks, Pitty served him coffee laced
with brandy and fluttered about him and Scarlett hung on his every
utterance.  Sometimes in the afternoons he took Scarlett riding
with him in his buggy when he went out on business.  These rides
were merry affairs because she asked so many foolish questions--
"just like a woman," he told himself approvingly.  He couldn't help
laughing at her ignorance about business matters and she laughed
too, saying:  "Well, of course, you can't expect a silly little
woman like me to understand men's affairs."

She made him feel, for the first time in his old-maidish life, that
he was a strong upstanding man fashioned by God in a nobler mold
than other men, fashioned to protect silly helpless women.

When, at last, they stood together to be married, her confiding
little hand in his and her downcast lashes throwing thick black
crescents on her pink cheeks, he still did not know how it all came
about.  He only knew he had done something romantic and exciting
for the first time in his life.  He, Frank Kennedy, had swept this
lovely creature off her feet and into his strong arms.  That was a
heady feeling.

No friend or relative stood up with them at their marriage.  The
witnesses were strangers called in from the street.  Scarlett had
insisted on that and he had given in, though reluctantly, for he
would have liked his sister and his brother-in-law from Jonesboro
to be with him.  And a reception with toasts drunk to the bride in
Miss Pitty's parlor amid happy friends would have been a joy to
him.  But Scarlett would not hear of even Miss Pitty being present.

"Just us two, Frank," she begged, squeezing his arm.  "Like an
elopement.  I always did want to run away and be married!  Please,
sweetheart, just for me!"

It was that endearing term, still so new to his ears, and the
bright teardrops which edged her pale green eyes as she looked up
pleadingly at him that won him over.  After all, a man had to make
some concessions to his bride, especially about the wedding, for
women set such a store by sentimental things.

And before he knew it, he was married.



Frank gave her the three hundred dollars, bewildered by her sweet
urgency, reluctant at first, because it meant the end of his hope
of buying the sawmill immediately.  But he could not see her family
evicted, and his disappointment soon faded at the sight of her
radiant happiness, disappeared entirely at the loving way she "took
on" over his generosity.  Frank had never before had a woman "take
on" over him and he came to feel that the money had been well
spent, after all.

Scarlett dispatched Mammy to Tara immediately for the triple
purpose of giving Will the money, announcing her marriage and
bringing Wade to Atlanta.  In two days she had a brief note from
Will which she carried about with her and read and reread with
mounting joy.  Will wrote that the taxes had been paid and Jonas
Wilkerson "acted up pretty bad" at the news but had made no other
threats so far.  Will closed by wishing her happiness, a laconic
formal statement which he qualified in no way.  She knew Will
understood what she had done and why she had done it and neither
blamed nor praised.  But what must Ashley think? she wondered
feverishly.  What must he think of me now, after what I said to him
so short a while ago in the orchard at Tara?

She also had a letter from Suellen, poorly spelled, violent,
abusive, tear splotched, a letter so full of venom and truthful
observations upon her character that she was never to forget it nor
forgive the writer.  But even Suellen's words could not dim her
happiness that Tara was safe, at least from immediate danger.

It was hard to realize that Atlanta and not Tara was her permanent
home now.  In her desperation to obtain the tax money, no thought
save Tara and the fate which threatened it had any place in her
mind.  Even at the moment of marriage, she had not given a thought
to the fact that the price she was paying for the safety of home
was permanent exile from it.  Now that the deed was done, she
realized this with a wave of homesickness hard to dispel.  But
there it was.  She had made her bargain and she intended to stand
by it.  And she was so grateful to Frank for saving Tara she felt a
warm affection for him and an equally warm determination that he
should never regret marrying her.

The ladies of Atlanta knew their neighbors' business only slightly
less completely than they knew their own and were far more
interested in it.  They all knew that for years Frank Kennedy had
had an "understanding" with Suellen O'Hara.  In fact, he had said,
sheepishly, that he expected to get married in the spring.  So the
tumult of gossip, surmise and deep suspicion which followed the
announcement of his quiet wedding to Scarlett was not surprising.
Mrs. Merriwether, who never let her curiosity go long unsatisfied
if she could help it, asked him point-blank just what he meant by
marrying one sister when he was betrothed to the other.  She
reported to Mrs. Elsing that all the answer she got for her pains
was a silly look.  Not even Mrs. Merriwether, doughty soul that she
was, dared to approach Scarlett on the subject.  Scarlett seemed
demure and sweet enough these days, but there was a pleased
complacency in her eyes which annoyed people and she carried a chip
on her shoulder which no one cared to disturb.

She knew Atlanta was talking but she did not care.  After all,
there wasn't anything immoral in marrying a man.  Tara was safe.
Let people talk.  She had too many other matters to occupy her
mind.  The most important was how to make Frank realize, in a
tactful manner, that his store should bring in more money.  After
the fright Jonas Wilkerson had given her, she would never rest easy
until she and Frank had some money ahead.  And even if no emergency
developed, Frank would need to make more money, if she was going to
save enough for next year's taxes.  Moreover, what Frank had said
about the sawmill stuck in her mind.  Frank could make lots of
money out of a mill.  Anybody could, with lumber selling at such
outrageous prices.  She fretted silently because Frank's money had
not been enough to pay the taxes on Tara and buy the mill as well.
And she made up her mind that he had to make more money on the
store somehow, and do it quickly, so he could buy that mill before
some one else snapped it up.  She could see it was a bargain.

If she were a man she would have that mill, if she had to mortgage
the store to raise the money.  But, when she intimated this
delicately to Frank, the day after they married, he smiled and told
her not to bother her sweet pretty little head about business
matters.  It had come as a surprise to him that she even knew what
a mortgage was and, at first, he was amused.  But this amusement
quickly passed and a sense of shock took its place in the early
days of their marriage.  Once, incautiously, he had told her that
"people" (he was careful not to mention names) owed him money but
could not pay just now and he was, of course, unwilling to press
old friends and gentlefolk.  Frank regretted ever mentioning it
for, thereafter, she had questioned him about it again and again.
She had the most charmingly childlike air but she was just curious,
she said, to know who owed him and how much they owed.  Frank was
very evasive about the matter.  He coughed nervously and waved his
hands and repeated his annoying remark about her sweet pretty
little head.

It had begun to dawn on him that this same sweet pretty little head
was a "good head for figures."  In fact, a much better one than his
own and the knowledge was disquieting.  He was thunderstruck to
discover that she could swiftly add a long column of figures in her
head when he needed a pencil and paper for more than three figures.
And fractions presented no difficulties to her at all.  He felt
there was something unbecoming about a woman understanding
fractions and business matters and he believed that, should a woman
be so unfortunate as to have such unladylike comprehension, she
should pretend not to.  Now he disliked talking business with her
as much as he had enjoyed it before they were married.  Then he had
thought it all beyond her mental grasp and it had been pleasant to
explain things to her.  Now he saw that she understood entirely too
well and he felt the usual masculine indignation at the duplicity
of women.  Added to it was the usual masculine disillusionment in
discovering that a woman has a brain.

Just how early in his married life Frank learned of the deception
Scarlett had used in marrying him, no one ever knew.  Perhaps the
truth dawned on him when Tony Fontaine, obviously fancy free, came
to Atlanta on business.  Perhaps it was told him more directly in
letters from his sister in Jonesboro who was astounded at his
marriage.  Certainly he never learned from Suellen herself.  She
never wrote him and naturally he could not write her and explain.
What good would explanations do anyway, now that he was married?
He writhed inwardly at the thought that Suellen would never know
the truth and would always think he had senselessly jilted her.
Probably everyone else was thinking this too and criticizing him.
It certainly put him in an awkward position.  And he had no way of
clearing himself, for a man couldn't go about saying he had lost
his head about a woman--and a gentleman couldn't advertise the fact
that his wife had entrapped him with a lie.

Scarlett was his wife and a wife was entitled to the loyalty of her
husband.  Furthermore, he could not bring himself to believe she
had married him coldly and with no affection for him at all.  His
masculine vanity would not permit such a thought to stay long in
his mind.  It was more pleasant to think she had fallen so suddenly
in love with him she had been willing to lie to get him.  But it
was all very puzzling.  He knew he was no great catch for a woman
half his age and pretty and smart to boot, but Frank was a
gentleman and he kept his bewilderment to himself.  Scarlett was
his wife and he could not insult her by asking awkward questions
which, after all, would not remedy matters.

Not that Frank especially wanted to remedy matters, for it appeared
that his marriage would be a happy one.  Scarlett was the most
charming and exciting of women and he thought her perfect in all
things--except that she was so headstrong.  Frank learned early in
his marriage that so long as she had her own way, life could be
very pleasant, but when she was opposed--  Given her own way, she
was as gay as a child, laughed a good deal, made foolish little
jokes, sat on his knee and tweaked his beard until he vowed he felt
twenty years younger.  She could be unexpectedly sweet and
thoughtful, having his slippers toasting at the fire when he came
home at night, fussing affectionately about his wet feet and
interminable head colds, remembering that he always liked the
gizzard of the chicken and three spoonfuls of sugar in his coffee.
Yes, life was very sweet and cozy with Scarlett--as long as she had
her own way.



When the marriage was two weeks old, Frank contracted the grippe
and Dr. Meade put him to bed.  In the first year of the war, Frank
had spent two months in the hospital with pneumonia and he had
lived in dread of another attack since that time, so he was only
too glad to lie sweating under three blankets and drink the hot
concoctions Mammy and Aunt Pitty brought him every hour.

The illness dragged on and Frank worried more and more about the
store as each day passed.  The place was in charge of the counter
boy, who came to the house every night to report on the day's
transactions, but Frank was not satisfied.  He fretted until
Scarlett who had only been waiting for such an opportunity laid a
cool hand on his forehead and said:  "Now, sweetheart, I shall be
vexed if you take on so.  I'll go to town and see how things are."

And she went, smiling as she smothered his feeble protests.  During
the three weeks of her new marriage, she had been in a fever to see
his account books and find out just how money matters stood.  What
luck that he was bedridden!

The store stood near Five Points, its new roof glaring against the
smoked bricks of the old walls.  Wooden awnings covered the
sidewalk to the edge of the street, and at the long iron bars
connecting the uprights horses and mules were hitched, their heads
bowed against the cold misty rain, their backs covered with torn
blankets and quilts.  The inside of the store was almost like
Bullard's store in Jonesboro, except that there were no loungers
about the roaring red-hot stove, whittling and spitting streams of
tobacco juice at the sand boxes.  It was bigger than Bullard's
store and much darker.  The wooden awnings cut off most of the
winter daylight and the interior was dim and dingy, only a trickle
of light coming in through the small fly-specked windows high up on
the side walls.  The floor was covered with muddy sawdust and
everywhere was dust and dirt.  There was a semblance of order in
the front of the store, where tall shelves rose into the gloom
stacked with bright bolts of cloth, china, cooking utensils and
notions.  But in the back, behind the partition, chaos reigned.

Here there was no flooring and the assorted jumble of stock was
piled helter-skelter on the hard-packed earth.  In the semi-
darkness she saw boxes and bales of goods, plows and harness and
saddles and cheap pine coffins.  Secondhand furniture, ranging from
cheap gum to mahogany and rosewood, reared up in the gloom, and the
rich but worn brocade and horsehair upholstery gleamed incongruously
in the dingy surroundings.  China chambers and bowl and pitcher sets
littered the floor and all around the four walls were deep bins, so
dark she had to hold the lamp directly over them to discover they
contained seeds, nails, bolts and carpenters' tools.

"I'd think a man as fussy and old maidish as Frank would keep
things tidier," she thought, scrubbing her grimy hands with her
handkerchief.  "This place is a pig pen.  What a way to run a
store!  If he'd only dust up this stuff and put it out in front
where folks could see it, he could sell things much quicker."

And if his stock was in such condition, what mustn't his accounts
be!

I'll look at his account book now, she thought and, picking up the
lamp, she went into the front of the store.  Willie, the counter
boy, was reluctant to give her the large dirty-backed ledger.  It
was obvious that, young as he was, he shared Frank's opinion that
women had no place in business.  But Scarlett silenced him with a
sharp word and sent him out to get his dinner.  She felt better
when he was gone, for his disapproval annoyed her, and she settled
herself in a split-bottomed chair by the roaring stove, tucked one
foot under her and spread the book across her lap.  It was dinner
time and the streets were deserted.  No customers called and she
had the store to herself.

She turned the pages slowly, narrowly scanning the rows of names
and figures written in Frank's cramped copperplate hand.  It was
just as she had expected, and she frowned as she saw this newest
evidence of Frank's lack of business sense.  At least five hundred
dollars in debts, some of them months old, were set down against
the names of people she knew well, the Merriwethers and the Elsings
among other familiar names.  From Frank's deprecatory remarks about
the money "people" owed him, she had imagined the sums to be small.
But this!

"If they can't pay, why do they keep on buying?" she thought
irritably.  "And if he knows they can't pay, why does he keep on
selling them stuff?  Lots of them could pay if he'd just make them
do it.  The Elsings certainly could if they could give Fanny a new
satin dress and an expensive wedding.  Frank's just too soft
hearted, and people take advantage of him.  Why, if he'd collected
half this money, he could have bought the sawmill and easily spared
me the tax money, too."

Then she thought:  "Just imagine Frank trying to operate a sawmill!
God's nightgown!  If he runs this store like a charitable
institution, how could he expect to make money on a mill?  The
sheriff would have it in a month.  Why, I could run this store
better than he does!  And I could run a mill better than he could,
even if I don't know anything about the lumber business!"

A startling thought this, that a woman could handle business
matters as well as or better than a man, a revolutionary thought to
Scarlett who had been reared in the tradition that men were
omniscient and women none too bright.  Of course, she had
discovered that this was not altogether true but the pleasant
fiction still stuck in her mind.  Never before had she put this
remarkable idea into words.  She sat quite still, with the heavy
book across her lap, her mouth a little open with surprise,
thinking that during the lean months at Tara she had done a man's
work and done it well.  She had been brought up to believe that a
woman alone could accomplish nothing, yet she had managed the
plantation without men to help her until Will came.  Why, why, her
mind stuttered, I believe women could manage everything in the
world without men's help--except having babies, and God knows, no
woman in her right mind would have babies if she could help it.

With the idea that she was as capable as a man came a sudden rush
of pride and a violent longing to prove it, to make money for
herself as men made money.  Money which would be her own, which she
would neither have to ask for nor account for to any man.

"I wish I had money enough to buy that mill myself," she said aloud
and sighed.  "I'd sure make it hum.  And I wouldn't let even one
splinter go out on credit."

She sighed again.  There was nowhere she could get any money, so
the idea was out of the question.  Frank would simply have to
collect this money owing him and buy the mill.  It was a sure way
to make money, and when he got the mill, she would certainly find
some way to make him be more businesslike in its operation than he
had been with the store.

She pulled a back page out of the ledger and began copying the list
of debtors who had made no payments in several months.  She'd take
the matter up with Frank just as soon as she reached home.  She'd
make him realize that these people had to pay their bills even if
they were old friends, even if it did embarrass him to press them
for money.  That would probably upset Frank, for he was timid and
fond of the approbation of his friends.  He was so thin skinned
he'd rather lose the money than be businesslike about collecting
it.

And he'd probably tell her that no one had any money with which to
pay him.  Well, perhaps that was true.  Poverty was certainly no
news to her.  But nearly everybody had saved some silver or jewelry
or was hanging on to a little real estate.  Frank could take them
in lieu of cash.

She could imagine how Frank would moan when she broached such an
idea to him.  Take the jewelry and property of his friends!  Well,
she shrugged, he can moan all he likes.  I'm going to tell him that
he may be willing to stay poor for friendship's sake but I'm not.
Frank will never get anywhere if he doesn't get up some gumption.
And he's got to get somewhere!  He's got to make money, even if
I've got to wear the pants in the family to make him do.

She was writing busily, her face screwed up with the effort, her
tongue clamped between her teeth, when the front door opened and a
great draft of cold wind swept the store.  A tall man came into the
dingy room walking with a light Indian-like tread, and looking up
she saw Rhett Butler.

He was resplendent in new clothes and a greatcoat with a dashing
cape thrown back from his heavy shoulders.  His tall hat was off in
a deep bow when her eyes met his and his hand went to the bosom of
a spotless pleated shirt.  His white teeth gleamed startlingly
against his brown face and his bold eyes raked her.

"My dear Mrs. Kennedy," he said, walking toward her.  "My very dear
Mrs. Kennedy!" and he broke into a loud merry laugh.

At first she was as startled as if a ghost had invaded the store
and then, hastily removing her foot from beneath her, she stiffened
her spine and gave him a cold stare.

"What are you doing here?"

"I called on Miss Pittypat and learned of your marriage and so I
hastened here to congratulate you."

The memory of her humiliation at his hands made her go crimson with
shame.

"I don't see how you have the gall to face me!" she cried.

"On the contrary!  How have you the gall to face me?"

"Oh, you are the most--"

"Shall we let the bugles sing truce?" he smiled down at her, a wide
flashing smile that had impudence in it but no shame for his own
actions or condemnation for hers.  In spite of herself, she had to
smile too, but it was a wry, uncomfortable smile.

"What a pity they didn't hang you!"

"Others share your feeling, I fear.  Come, Scarlett, relax.  You
look like you'd swallowed a ramrod and it isn't becoming.  Surely,
you've had time to recover from my--er--my little joke."

"Joke?  Ha!  I'll never get over it!"

"Oh, yes, you will.  You are just putting on this indignant front
because you think it's proper and respectable.  May I sit down?"

"No."

He sank into a chair beside her and grinned.

"I hear you couldn't even wait two weeks for me," he said and gave
a mock sigh.  "How fickle is woman!"

When she did not reply he continued.

"Tell me, Scarlett, just between friends--between very old and very
intimate friends--wouldn't it have been wiser to wait until I got
out of jail?  Or are the charms of wedlock with old Frank Kennedy
more alluring than illicit relations with me?"

As always when his mockery aroused wrath within her, wrath fought
with laughter at his impudence.

"Don't be absurd."

"And would you mind satisfying my curiosity on one point which has
bothered me for some time?  Did you have no womanly repugnance, no
delicate shrinking from marrying not just one man but two for whom
you had no love or even affection?  Or have I been misinformed
about the delicacy of our Southern womanhood?"

"Rhett!"

"I have my answer.  I always felt that women had a hardness and
endurance unknown to men, despite the pretty idea taught me in
childhood that women are frail, tender, sensitive creatures.  But
after all, according to the Continental code of etiquette, it's
very bad form for husband and wife to love each other.  Very bad
taste, indeed.  I always felt that the Europeans had the right idea
in that matter.  Marry for convenience and love for pleasure.  A
sensible system, don't you think?  You are closer to the old
country than I thought."

How pleasant it would be to shout at him:  "I did not marry for
convenience!"  But unfortunately, Rhett had her there and any
protest of injured innocence would only bring more barbed remarks
from him.

"How you do run on," she said coolly.  Anxious to change the
subject, she asked:  "How did you ever get out of jail?"

"Oh, that!" he answered, making an airy gesture.  "Not much
trouble.  They let me out this morning.  I employed a delicate
system of blackmail on a friend in Washington who is quite high in
the councils of the Federal government.  A splendid fellow--one of
the staunch Union patriots from whom I used to buy muskets and hoop
skirts for the Confederacy.  When my distressing predicament was
brought to his attention in the right way, he hastened to use his
influence, and so I was released.  Influence is everything, and
guilt or innocence merely an academic question."

"I'll take oath you weren't innocent."

"No, now that I am free of the toils, I'll frankly admit that I'm
as guilty as Cain.  I did kill the nigger.  He was uppity to a
lady, and what else could a Southern gentleman do?  And while I'm
confessing, I must admit that I shot a Yankee cavalryman after some
words in a barroom.  I was not charged with that peccadillo, so
perhaps some other poor devil has been hanged for it, long since."

He was so blithe about his murders her blood chilled.  Words of
moral indignation rose to her lips but suddenly she remembered the
Yankee who lay under the tangle of scuppernong vines at Tara.  He
had not been on her conscience any more than a roach upon which she
might have stepped.  She could not sit in judgment on Rhett when
she was as guilty as he.

"And, as I seem to be making a clean breast of it, I must tell you,
in strictest confidence (that means, don't tell Miss Pittypat!)
that I did have the money, safe in a bank in Liverpool."

"The money?"

"Yes, the money the Yankees were so curious about.  Scarlett, it
wasn't altogether meanness that kept me from giving you the money
you wanted.  If I'd drawn a draft they could have traced it somehow
and I doubt if you'd have gotten a cent.  My only hope lay in doing
nothing.  I knew the money was pretty safe, for if worst came to
worst, if they had located it and tried to take it away from me, I
would have named every Yankee patriot who sold me bullets and
machinery during the war.  Then there would have been a stink, for
some of them are high up in Washington now.  In fact, it was my
threat to unbosom my conscience about them that got me out of jail.
I--"

"Do you mean you--you actually have the Confederate gold?"

"Not all of it.  Good Heavens, no!  There must be fifty or more ex-
blockaders who have plenty salted away in Nassau and England and
Canada.  We will be pretty unpopular with the Confederates who
weren't as slick as we were.  I have got close to half a million.
Just think, Scarlett, a half-million dollars, if you'd only
restrained your fiery nature and not rushed into wedlock again!"

A half-million dollars.  She felt a pang of almost physical
sickness at the thought of so much money.  His jeering words passed
over her head and she did not even hear them.  It was hard to
believe there was so much money in all this bitter and poverty-
stricken world.  So much money, so very much money, and someone
else had it, someone who took it lightly and didn't need it.  And
she had only a sick elderly husband and this dirty, piddling,
little store between her and a hostile world.  It wasn't fair that
a reprobate like Rhett Butler should have so much and she, who
carried so heavy a load, should have so little.  She hated him,
sitting there in his dandified attire, taunting her.  Well, she
wouldn't swell his conceit by complimenting him on his cleverness.
She longed viciously for sharp words with which to cut him.

"I suppose you think it's honest to keep the Confederate money.
Well, it isn't.  It's plain out and out stealing and you know it.
I wouldn't have that on my conscience."

"My!  How sour the grapes are today!" he exclaimed, screwing up his
face.  "And just whom am I stealing from?"

She was silent, trying to think just whom indeed.  After all, he
had only done what Frank had done on a small scale.

"Half the money is honestly mine," he continued, "honestly made
with the aid of honest Union patriots who were willing to sell out
the Union behind its back--for one-hundred-per-cent profit on their
goods.  Part I made out of my little investment in cotton at the
beginning of the war, the cotton I bought cheap and sold for a
dollar a pound when the British mills were crying for it.  Part I
got from food speculation.  Why should I let the Yankees have the
fruits of my labor?  But the rest did belong to the Confederacy.
It came from Confederate cotton which I managed to run through the
blockade and sell in Liverpool at sky-high prices.  The cotton was
given me in good faith to buy leather and rifles and machinery
with.  And it was taken by me in good faith to buy the same.  My
orders were to leave the gold in English banks, under my own name,
in order that my credit would be good.  You remember when the
blockade tightened, I couldn't get a boat out of any Confederate
port or into one, so there the money stayed in England.  What should
I have done?  Drawn out all that gold from English banks, like a
simpleton, and tried to run it into Wilmington?  And let the Yankees
capture it?  Was it my fault that the blockade got too tight?  Was
it my fault that our Cause failed?  The money belonged to the
Confederacy.  Well, there is no Confederacy now--though you'd never
know it, to hear some people talk.  Whom shall I give the money to?
The Yankee government?  I should so hate for people to think me a
thief."

He removed a leather case from his pocket, extracted a long cigar
and smelled it approvingly, meanwhile watching her with pseudo
anxiety as if he hung on her words.

Plague take him, she thought, he's always one jump ahead of me.
There is always something wrong with his arguments but I never can
put my finger on just what it is.

"You might," she said with dignity, "distribute it to those who
are in need.  The Confederacy is gone but there are plenty of
Confederates and their families who are starving."

He threw back his bead and laughed rudely.

"You are never so charming or so absurd as when you are airing some
hypocrisy like that," he cried in frank enjoyment.  "Always tell
the truth, Scarlett.  You can't lie.  The Irish are the poorest
liars in the world.  Come now, be frank.  You never gave a damn
about the late lamented Confederacy and you care less about the
starving Confederates.  You'd scream in protest if I even suggested
giving away all the money unless I started off by giving you the
lion's share."

"I don't want your money," she began, trying to be coldly dignified.

"Oh, don't you!  Your palm is itching to beat the band this minute.
If I showed you a quarter, you'd leap on it."

"If you have come here to insult me and laugh at my poverty, I will
wish you good day," she retorted, trying to rid her lap of the
heavy ledger so she might rise and make her words more impressive.
Instantly, he was on his feet bending over her, laughing as he
pushed her back into her chair.

"When will you ever get over losing your temper when you hear the
truth?  You never mind speaking the truth about other people, so
why should you mind hearing it about yourself?  I'm not insulting
you.  I think acquisitiveness is a very fine quality."

She was not sure what acquisitiveness meant but as he praised it
she felt slightly mollified.

"I didn't come to gloat over your poverty but to wish you long life
and happiness in your marriage.  By the way, what did sister Sue
think of your larceny?"

"My what?"

"Your stealing Frank from under her nose."

"I did not--"

"Well, we won't quibble about the word.  What did she say?"

"She said nothing," said Scarlett.  His eyes danced as they gave
her the lie.

"How unselfish of her.  Now, let's hear about your poverty.  Surely
I have the right to know, after your little trip out to the jail
not long ago.  Hasn't Frank as much money as you hoped?"

There was no evading his impudence.  Either she would have to put
up with it or ask him to leave.  And now she did not want him to
leave.  His words were barbed but they were the barbs of truth.  He
knew what she had done and why she had done it and he did not seem
to think the less of her for it.  And though his questions were
unpleasantly blunt, they seemed actuated by a friendly interest.
He was one person to whom she could tell the truth.  That would be
a relief, for it had been so long since she had told anyone the
truth about herself and her motives.  Whenever she spoke her mind
everyone seemed to be shocked.  Talking to Rhett was comparable
only to one thing, the feeling of ease and comfort afforded by a
pair of old slippers after dancing in a pair too tight.

"Didn't you get the money for the taxes?  Don't tell me the wolf is
still at the door of Tara."  There was a different tone in his
voice.

She looked up to meet his dark eyes and caught an expression which
startled and puzzled her at first, and then made her suddenly
smile, a sweet and charming smile which was seldom on her face
these days.  What a perverse wretch he was, but how nice he could
be at times!  She knew now that the real reason for his call was
not to tease her but to make sure she had gotten the money for
which she had been so desperate.  She knew now that he had hurried
to her as soon as he was released, without the slightest appearance
of hurry, to lend her the money if she still needed it.  And yet he
would torment and insult her and deny that such was his intent,
should she accuse him.  He was quite beyond all comprehension.  Did
he really care about her, more than he was willing to admit?  Or
did he have some other motive?  Probably the latter, she thought.
But who could tell?  He did such strange things sometimes.

"No," she said, "the wolf isn't at the door any longer.  I--I got
the money."

"But not without a struggle, I'll warrant.  Did you manage to
restrain yourself until you got the wedding ring on your finger?"

She tried not to smile at his accurate summing up of her conduct
but she could not help dimpling.  He seated himself again,
sprawling his long legs comfortably.

"Well, tell me about your poverty.  Did Frank, the brute, mislead
you about his prospects?  He should be soundly thrashed for taking
advantage of a helpless female.  Come, Scarlett, tell me
everything.  You should have no secrets from me.  Surely, I know
the worst about you."

"Oh, Rhett, you're the worst--well, I don't know what!  No, he
didn't exactly fool me but--"  Suddenly it became a pleasure to
unburden herself.  "Rhett, if Frank would just collect the money
people owe him, I wouldn't be worried about anything.  But, Rhett,
fifty people owe him and he won't press them.  He's so thin
skinned.  He says a gentleman can't do that to another gentleman.
And it may be months and may be never before we get the money."

"Well, what of it?  Haven't you enough to eat on until he does
collect?"

"Yes, but--well, as a matter of fact, I could use a little money
right now."  Her eyes brightened as she thought of the mill.
"Perhaps--"

"What for?  More taxes?"

"Is that any of your business?"

"Yes, because you are getting ready to touch me for a loan.  Oh, I
know all the approaches.  And I'll lend it to you--without, my dear
Mrs. Kennedy, that charming collateral you offered me a short while
ago.  Unless, of course, you insist."

"You are the coarsest--"

"Not at all.  I merely wanted to set your mind at ease.  I knew
you'd be worried about that point.  Not much worried but a little.
And I'm willing to lend you the money.  But I do want to know how
you are going to spend it.  I have that right, I believe.  If it's
to buy you pretty frocks or a carriage, take it with my blessing.
But if it's to buy a new pair of breeches for Ashley Wilkes, I fear
I must decline to lend it."

She was hot with sudden rage and she stuttered until words came.

"Ashley Wilkes has never taken a cent from me!  I couldn't make him
take a cent if he were starving!  You don't understand him, how
honorable, how proud he is!  Of course, you can't understand him,
being what you are--"

"Don't let's begin calling names.  I could call you a few that
would match any you could think of for me.  You forget that I have
been keeping up with you through Miss Pittypat, and the dear soul
tells all she knows to any sympathetic listener.  I know that
Ashley has been at Tara ever since he came home from Rock Island.
I know that you have even put up with having his wife around, which
must have been a strain on you."

"Ashley is--"

"Oh, yes," he said, waving his hand negligently.  "Ashley is too
sublime for my earthy comprehension.  But please don't forget I was
an interested witness to your tender scene with him at Twelve Oaks
and something tells me he hasn't changed since then.  And neither
have you.  He didn't cut so sublime a figure that day, if I
remember rightly.  And I don't think the figure he cuts now is much
better.  Why doesn't he take his family and get out and find work?
And stop living at Tara?  Of course, it's just a whim of mine, but
I don't intend to lend you a cent for Tara to help support him.
Among men, there's a very unpleasant name for men who permit women
to support them."

"How dare you say such things?  He's been working like a field
hand!"  For all her rage, her heart was wrung by the memory of
Ashley splitting fence rails.

"And worth his weight in gold, I dare say.  What a hand he must be
with the manure and--"

"He's--"

"Oh, yes, I know.  Let's grant that he does the best he can but I
don't imagine he's much help.  You'll never make a farm hand out of
a Wilkes--or anything else that's useful.  The breed is purely
ornamental.  Now, quiet your ruffled feathers and overlook my
boorish remarks about the proud and honorable Ashley.  Strange how
these illusions will persist even in women as hard headed as you
are.  How much money do you want and what do you want it for?"

When she did not answer he repeated:

"What do you want it for?  And see if you can manage to tell me the
truth.  It will do as well as a lie.  In fact, better, for if you
lie to me, I'll be sure to find it out, and think how embarrassing
that would be.  Always remember this, Scarlett, I can stand
anything from you but a lie--your dislike for me, your tempers, all
your vixenish ways, but not a lie.  Now what do you want it for?"

Raging as she was at his attack on Ashley, she would have given
anything to spit on him and throw his offer of money proudly into
his mocking face.  For a moment she almost did, but the cold hand
of common sense held her back.  She swallowed her anger with poor
grace and tried to assume an expression of pleasant dignity.  He
leaned back in his chair, stretching his legs toward the stove.

"If there's one thing in the world that gives me more amusement
than anything else," he remarked, "it's the sight of your mental
struggles when a matter of principle is laid up against something
practical like money.  Of course, I know the practical in you will
always win, but I keep hanging around to see if your better nature
won't triumph some day.  And when that day comes I shall pack my
bag and leave Atlanta forever.  There are too many women whose
better natures are always triumphing. . . .  Well, let's get back
to business.  How much and what for?"

"I don't know quite how much I'll need," she said sulkily.  "But I
want to buy a sawmill--and I think I can get it cheap.  And I'll
need two wagons and two mules.  I want good mules, too.  And a
horse and buggy for my own use."

"A sawmill?"

"Yes, and if you'll lend me the money, I'll give you a half-
interest in it."

"Whatever would I do with a sawmill?"

"Make money!  We can make loads of money.  Or I'll pay you interest
on the loan--let's see, what is good interest?"

"Fifty per cent is considered very fine."

"Fifty--oh, but you are joking!  Stop laughing, you devil.  I'm
serious."

"That's why I'm laughing.  I wonder if anyone but me realizes what
goes on in that head back of your deceptively sweet face."

"Well, who cares?  Listen, Rhett, and see if this doesn't sound
like good business to you.  Frank told me about this man who has a
sawmill, a little one out Peachtree road, and he wants to sell it.
He's got to have cash money pretty quick and he'll sell it cheap.
There aren't many sawmills around here now, and the way people are
rebuilding--why, we could sell lumber sky high.  The man will stay
and run the mill for a wage.  Frank told me about it.  Frank would
buy the mill himself if he had the money.  I guess he was intending
buying it with the money he gave me for the taxes."

"Poor Frank!  What is he going to say when you tell him you've
bought it yourself right out from under him?  And how are you going
to explain my lending you the money without compromising your
reputation?"

Scarlett had given no thought to this, so intent was she upon the
money the mill would bring in.

"Well, I just won't tell him."

"He'll know you didn't pick it off a bush."

"I'll tell him--why, yes, I'll tell him I sold you my diamond
earbobs.  And I will give them to you, too.  That'll be my collat--
my whatchucallit."

"I wouldn't take your earbobs."

"I don't want them.  I don't like them.  They aren't really mine,
anyway."

"Whose are they?"

Her mind went swiftly back to the still hot noon with the country
hush deep about Tara and the dead man in blue sprawled in the hall.

"They were left with me--by someone who's dead.  They're mine all
right.  Take them.  I don't want them.  I'd rather have the money
for them."

"Good Lord!" he cried impatiently.  "Don't you ever think of
anything but money?"

"No," she replied frankly, turning hard green eyes upon him.  "And
if you'd been through what I have, you wouldn't either.  I've found
out that money is the most important thing in the world and, as God
is my witness, I don't ever intend to be without it again."

She remembered the hot sun, the soft red earth under her sick head,
the niggery smell of the cabin behind the ruins of Twelve Oaks,
remembered the refrain her heart had beaten:  "I'll never be hungry
again.  I'll never be hungry again."

"I'm going to have money some day, lots of it, so I can have
anything I want to eat.  And then there'll never be any hominy or
dried peas on my table.  And I'm going to have pretty clothes and
all of them are going to be silk--"

"All?"

"All," she said shortly, not even troubling to blush at his
implication.  "I'm going to have money enough so the Yankees can
never take Tara away from me.  And I'm going to have a new roof for
Tara and a new barn and fine mules for plowing and more cotton than
you ever saw.  And Wade isn't ever going to know what it means to
do without the things he needs.  Never!  He's going to have
everything in the world.  And all my family, they aren't ever going
to be hungry again.  I mean it.  Every word.  You don't understand,
you're such a selfish hound.  You've never had the Carpetbaggers
trying to drive you out.  You've never been cold and ragged and had
to break your back to keep from starving!"

He said quietly:  "I was in the Confederate Army for eight months.
I don't know any better place for starving."

"The army!  Bah!  You've never had to pick cotton and weed corn.
You've--  Don't you laugh at me!"

His hands were on hers again as her voice rose harshly.

"I wasn't laughing at you.  I was laughing at the difference in
what you look and what you really are.  And I was remembering the
first time I ever saw you, at the barbecue at the Wilkes'.  You had
on a green dress and little green slippers, and you were knee deep
in men and quite full of yourself.  I'll wager you didn't know then
how many pennies were in a dollar.  There was only one idea in your
whole mind then and that was ensnaring Ash--"

She jerked her hands away from him.

"Rhett, if we are to get on at all, you'll have to stop talking
about Ashley Wilkes.  We'll always fall out about him, because you
can't understand him."

"I suppose you understand him like a book," said Rhett maliciously.
"No, Scarlett, if I am to lend you the money I reserve the right to
discuss Ashley Wilkes in any terms I care to.  I waive the right to
collect interest on my loan but not that right.  And there are a
number of things about that young man I'd like to know."

"I do not have to discuss him with you," she answered shortly.

"Oh, but you do!  I hold the purse strings, you see.  Some day when
you are rich, you can have the power to do the same to others. . . .
It's obvious that you still care about him--"

"I do not."

"Oh, it's so obvious from the way you rush to his defense.  You--"

"I won't stand having my friends sneered at."

"Well, we'll let that pass for the moment.  Does he still care for
you or did Rock Island make him forget?  Or perhaps he's learned to
appreciate what a jewel of a wife he has?"

At the mention of Melanie, Scarlett began to breathe hard and could
scarcely restrain herself from crying out the whole story, that
only honor kept Ashley with Melanie.  She opened her mouth to speak
and then closed it.

"Oh.  So he still hasn't enough sense to appreciate Mrs. Wilkes?
And the rigors of prison didn't dim his ardor for you?"

"I see no need to discuss the subject."

"I wish to discuss it," said Rhett.  There was a low note in his
voice which Scarlett did not understand but did not like to hear.
"And, by God, I will discuss it and I expect you to answer me.  So
he's still in love with you?"

"Well, what if he is?" cried Scarlett, goaded.  "I don't care to
discuss him with you because you can't understand him or his kind
of love.  The only kind of love you know about is just--well, the
kind you carry on with creatures like that Watling woman."

"Oh," said Rhett softly.  "So I am only capable of carnal lusts?"

"Well, you know it's true."

"Now I appreciate your hesitance in discussing the matter with me.
My unclean hands and lips besmirch the purity of his love."

"Well, yes--something like that."

"I'm interested in this pure love--"

"Don't be so nasty, Rhett Butler.  If you are vile enough to think
there's ever been anything wrong between us--"

"Oh, the thought never entered my head, really.  That's why it all
interests me.  Just why hasn't there been anything wrong between
you?"

"If you think that Ashley would--"

"Ah, so it's Ashley, and not you, who has fought the fight for
purity.  Really, Scarlett, you should not give yourself away so
easily."

Scarlett looked into his smooth unreadable face in confusion and
indignation.

"We won't go any further with this and I don't want your money.
So, get out!"

"Oh, yes, you do want my money and, as we've gone this far, why
stop?  Surely there can be no harm in discussing so chaste an idyl--
when there hasn't been anything wrong.  So Ashley loves you for
your mind, your soul, your nobility of character?"

Scarlett writhed at his words.  Of course, Ashley loved her for
just these things.  It was this knowledge that made life endurable,
this knowledge that Ashley, bound by honor, loved her from afar for
beautiful things deep buried in her that he alone could see.  But
they did not seem so beautiful when dragged to the light by Rhett,
especially in that deceptively smooth voice that covered sarcasm.

"It gives me back my boyish ideals to know that such a love can
exist in this naughty world," he continued.  "So there's no touch
of the flesh in his love for you?  It would be the same if you were
ugly and didn't have that white skin?  And if you didn't have those
green eyes which make a man wonder just what you would do if he
took you in his arms?  And a way of swaying your hips, that's an
allurement to any man under ninety?  And those lips which are--
well, I mustn't let my carnal lusts obtrude.  Ashley sees none of
these things?  Or if he sees them, they move him not at all?"

Unbidden, Scarlett's mind went back to that day in the orchard when
Ashley's arms shook as he held her, when his mouth was hot on hers
as if he would never let her go.  She went crimson at the memory
and her blush was not lost on Rhett.

"So," he said and there was a vibrant note almost like anger in his
voice.  "I see.  He loves you for your mind alone."

How dare he pry with dirty fingers, making the one beautiful sacred
thing in her life seem vile?  Coolly, determinedly, he was breaking
down the last of her reserves and the information he wanted was
forthcoming.

"Yes, he does!" she cried, pushing back the memory of Ashley's
lips.

"My dear, he doesn't even know you've got a mind.  If it was your
mind that attracted him, he would not need to struggle against you,
as he must have done to keep this love so--shall we say 'holy'?  He
could rest easily for, after all, a man can admire a woman's mind
and soul and still be an honorable gentleman and true to his wife.
But it must be difficult for him to reconcile the honor of the
Wilkeses with coveting your body as he does."

"You judge everybody's mind by your own vile one!"

"Oh, I've never denied coveting you, if that's what you mean.  But,
thank God, I'm not bothered about matters of honor.  What I want I
take if I can get it, and so I wrestle neither with angels nor
devils.  What a merry hell you must have made for Ashley!  Almost I
can be sorry for him."

"I--I make a hell for him?"

"Yes, you!  There you are, a constant temptation to him, but like
most of his breed he prefers what passes in these parts as honor to
any amount of love.  And it looks to me as if the poor devil now
had neither love nor honor to warm himself!"

"He has love! . . . I mean, he loves me!"

"Does he?  Then answer me this and we are through for the day and
you can take the money and throw it in the gutter for all I care."

Rhett rose to his feet and threw his half-smoked cigar into the
spittoon.  There was about his movements the same pagan freedom and
leashed power Scarlett had noted that night Atlanta fell, something
sinister and a little frightening.  "If he loved you, then why in
hell did he permit you to come to Atlanta to get the tax money?
Before I'd let a woman I loved do that, I'd--"

"He didn't know!  He had no idea that I--"

"Doesn't it occur to you that he should have known?"  There was
barely suppressed savagery in his voice.  "Loving you as you say he
does, he should have known just what you would do when you were
desperate.  He should have killed you rather than let you come up
here--and to me, of all people!  God in Heaven!"

"But he didn't know!"

"If he didn't guess it without being told, he'll never know
anything about you and your precious mind."

How unfair he was!  As if Ashley was a mind reader!  As if Ashley
could have stopped her, even had he known!  But, she knew suddenly,
Ashley could have stopped her.  The faintest intimation from him,
in the orchard, that some day things might be different and she
would never have thought of going to Rhett.  A word of tenderness,
even a parting caress when she was getting on the train, would have
held her back.  But he had only talked of honor.  Yet--was Rhett
right?  Should Ashley have known her mind?  Swiftly she put the
disloyal thought from her.  Of course, he didn't suspect.  Ashley
would never suspect that she would even think of doing anything so
immoral.  Ashley was too fine to have such thoughts.  Rhett was
just trying to spoil her love.  He was trying to tear down what was
most precious to her.  Some day, she thought viciously, when the
store was on its feet and the mill doing nicely and she had money,
she would make Rhett Butler pay for the misery and humiliation he
was causing her.

He was standing over her, looking down at her, faintly amused.  The
emotion which had stirred him was gone.

"What does it all matter to you anyway?" she asked.  "It's my
business and Ashley's and not yours."

He shrugged.

"Only this.  I have a deep and impersonal admiration for your
endurance, Scarlett, and I do not like to see your spirit crushed
beneath too many millstones.  There's Tara.  That's a man-sized job
in itself.  There's your sick father added on.  He'll never be any
help to you.  And the girls and the darkies.  And now you've taken
on a husband and probably Miss Pittypat, too.  You've enough
burdens without Ashley Wilkes and his family on your hands."

"He's not on my hands.  He helps--"

"Oh, for God's sake," he said impatiently.  "Don't let's have any
more of that.  He's no help.  He's on your hands and he'll be on
them, or on somebody's, till he dies.  Personally, I'm sick of him
as a topic of conversation. . . .  How much money do you want?"

Vituperative words rushed to her lips.  After all his insults,
after dragging from her those things which were most precious to
her and trampling on them, he still thought she would take his
money!

But the words were checked unspoken.  How wonderful it would be to
scorn his offer and order him out of the store!  But only the truly
rich and the truly secure could afford this luxury.  So long as she
was poor, just so long would she have to endure such scenes as
this.  But when she was rich--oh, what a beautiful warming thought
that was!--when she was rich, she wouldn't stand anything she
didn't like, do without anything she desired or even be polite to
people unless they pleased her.

I shall tell them all to go to Halifax, she thought, and Rhett
Butler will be the first one!

The pleasure in the thought brought a sparkle into her green eyes
and a half-smile to her lips.  Rhett smiled too.

"You're a pretty person, Scarlett," he said.  "Especially when you
are meditating devilment.  And just for the sight of that dimple
I'll buy you a baker's dozen of mules if you want them."

The front door opened and the counter boy entered, picking his
teeth with a quill.  Scarlett rose, pulled her shawl about her and
tied her bonnet strings firmly under her chin.  Her mind was made
up.

"Are you busy this afternoon?  Can you come with me now?" she
asked.

"Where?"

"I want you to drive to the mill with me.  I promised Frank I
wouldn't drive out of town by myself."

"To the mill in this rain?"

"Yes, I want to buy that mill now, before you change your mind."

He laughed so loudly the boy behind the counter started and looked
at him curiously.

"Have you forgotten you are married?  Mrs. Kennedy can't afford to
be seen driving out into the country with that Butler reprobate,
who isn't received in the best parlors.  Have you forgotten your
reputation?"

"Reputation, fiddle-dee-dee!  I want that mill before you change
your mind or Frank finds out that I'm buying it.  Don't be a slow
poke, Rhett.  What's a little rain?  Let's hurry."



That sawmill!  Frank groaned every time he thought of it, cursing
himself for ever mentioning it to her.  It was bad enough for her
to sell her earrings to Captain Butler (of all people!) and buy the
mill without even consulting her own husband about it, but it was
worse still that she did not turn it over to him to operate.  That
looked bad.  As if she did not trust him or his judgment.

Frank, in common with all men he knew, felt that a wife should be
guided by her husband's superior knowledge, should accept his
opinions in full and have none of her own.  He would have given
most women their own way.  Women were such funny little creatures
and it never hurt to humor their small whims.  Mild and gentle by
nature, it was not in him to deny a wife much.  He would have
enjoyed gratifying the foolish notions of some soft little person
and scolding her lovingly for her stupidity and extravagance.  But
the things Scarlett set her mind on were unthinkable.

That sawmill, for example.  It was the shock of his life when she
told him with a sweet smile, in answer to his questions, that she
intended to run it herself.  "Go into the lumber business myself,"
was the way she put it.  Frank would never forget the horror of
that moment.  Go into business for herself!  It was unthinkable.
There were no women in business in Atlanta.  In fact, Frank had
never heard of a woman in business anywhere.  If women were so
unfortunate as to be compelled to make a little money to assist
their families in these hard times, they made it in quiet womanly
ways--baking as Mrs. Merriwether was doing, or painting china and
sewing and keeping boarders, like Mrs. Elsing and Fanny, or
teaching school like Mrs. Meade or giving music lessons like Mrs.
Bonnell.  These ladies made money but they kept themselves at home
while they did it, as a woman should.  But for a woman to leave the
protection of her home and venture out into the rough world of men,
competing with them in business, rubbing shoulders with them, being
exposed to insult and gossip. . . .  Especially when she wasn't
forced to do it, when she had a husband amply able to provide for
her!

Frank had hoped she was only teasing or playing a joke on him, a
joke of questionable taste, but he soon found she meant what she
said.  She did operate the sawmill.  She rose earlier than he did
to drive out Peachtree road and frequently did not come home until
long after he had locked up the store and returned to Aunt Pitty's
for supper.  She drove the long miles to the mill with only the
disapproving Uncle Peter to protect her and the woods were full of
free niggers and Yankee riffraff.  Frank couldn't go with her, the
store took all of his time, but when he protested, she said
shortly:  "If I don't keep an eye on that slick scamp, Johnson,
he'll steal my lumber and sell it and put the money in his pocket.
When I can get a good man to run the mill for me, then I won't have
to go out there so often.  Then I can spend my time in town selling
lumber."

Selling lumber in town!  That was worst of all.  She frequently did
take a day off from the mill and peddle lumber and, on those days,
Frank wished he could hide in the dark back room of his store and
see no one.  His wife selling lumber!

And people were talking terrible about her.  Probably about him
too, for permitting her to behave in so unwomanly a fashion.  It
embarrassed him to face his customers over the counter and hear
them say:  "I saw Mrs. Kennedy a few minutes ago over at . . ."
Everyone took pains to tell him what she did.  Everyone was talking
about what happened over where the new hotel was being built.
Scarlett had driven up just as Tommy Wellburn was buying some
lumber from another man and she climbed down out of the buggy among
the rough Irish masons who were laying the foundations, and told
Tommy briefly that he was being cheated.  She said her lumber was
better and cheaper too, and to prove it she ran up a long column of
figures in her head and gave him an estimate then and there.  It
was bad enough that she had intruded herself among strange rough
workmen, but it was still worse for a woman to show publicly that
she could do mathematics like that.  When Tommy accepted her
estimate and gave her the order, Scarlett had not taken her
departure speedily and meekly but had idled about, talking to
Johnnie Gallegher, the foreman of the Irish workers, a hard-bitten
little gnome of a man who had a very bad reputation.  The town
talked about it for weeks.

On top of everything else, she was actually making money out of the
mill, and no man could feel right about a wife who succeeded in so
unwomanly an activity.  Nor did she turn over the money or any part
of it to him to use in the store.  Most of it went to Tara and she
wrote interminable letters to Will Benteen telling him just how it
should be spent.  Furthermore, she told Frank that if the repairs
at Tara could ever be completed, she intended to lend out her money
on mortgages.

"My!  My!" moaned Frank whenever he thought of this.  A woman had
no business even knowing what a mortgage was.

Scarlett was full of plans these days and each one of them seemed
worse to Frank than the previous one.  She even talked of building
a saloon on the property where her warehouse had been until Sherman
burned it.  Frank was no teetotaler but he feverishly protested
against the idea.  Owning saloon property was a bad business,
an unlucky business, almost as bad as renting to a house of
prostitution.  Just why it was bad, he could not explain to her
and to his lame arguments she said "Fiddle-dee-dee!"

"Saloons are always good tenants.  Uncle Henry said so," she told
him.  "They always pay their rent and, look here, Frank, I could
put up a cheap salon out of poor-grade lumber I can't sell and get
good rent for it, and with the rent money and the money from the
mill and what I could get from mortgages, I could buy some more
sawmills."

"Sugar, you don't need any more sawmills!" cried Frank, appalled.
"What you ought to do is sell the one you've got.  It's wearing you
out and you know what trouble you have keeping free darkies at work
there--"

"Free darkies are certainly worthless," Scarlett agreed, completely
ignoring his hint that she should sell.  "Mr. Johnson says he never
knows when he comes to work in the morning whether he'll have a
full crew or not.  You just can't depend on the darkies any more.
They work a day or two and then lay off till they've spent their
wages, and the whole crew is like as not to quit overnight.  The
more I see of emancipation the more criminal I think it is.  It's
just ruined the darkies.  Thousands of them aren't working at all
and the ones we can get to work at the mill are so lazy and
shiftless they aren't worth having.  And if you so much as swear at
them, much less hit them a few licks for the good of their souls,
the Freedmen's Bureau is down on you like a duck on a June bug."

"Sugar, you aren't letting Mr. Johnson beat those--"

"Of course not," she returned impatiently.  "Didn't I just say the
Yankees would put me in jail if I did?"

"I'll bet your pa never hit a darky a lick in his life," said
Frank.

"Well, only one.  A stable boy who didn't rub down his horse after
a day's hunt.  But, Frank; it was different then.  Free issue
niggers are something else, and a good whipping would do some of
them a lot of good."

Frank was not only amazed at his wife's views and her plans but at
the change which had come over her in the few months since their
marriage.  This wasn't the soft, sweet, feminine person he had
taken to wife.  In the brief period of the courtship, he thought he
had never known a woman more attractively feminine in her reactions
to life, ignorant, timid and helpless.  Now her reactions were all
masculine.  Despite her pink cheeks and dimples and pretty smiles,
she talked and acted like a man.  Her voice was brisk and decisive
and she made up her mind instantly and with no girlish shilly-
shallying.  She knew what she wanted and she went after it by the
shortest route, like a man, not by the hidden and circuitous routes
peculiar to women.

It was not that Frank had never seen commanding women before this.
Atlanta, like all Southern towns, had its share of dowagers whom no
one cared to cross.  No one could be more dominating than stout
Mrs. Merriwether, more imperious than frail Mrs. Elsing, more
artful in securing her own ends than the silver-haired sweet-voiced
Mrs. Whiting.  But no matter what devices these ladies employed in
order to get their own way, they were always feminine devices.
They made a point of being deferential to men's opinions, whether
they were guided by them or not.  They had the politeness to appear
to be guided by what men said, and that was what mattered.  But
Scarlett was guided by no one but herself and was conducting her
affairs in a masculine way which had the whole town talking about
her.

"And," thought Frank miserably, "probably talking about me too, for
letting her act so unwomanly."

Then, there was that Butler man.  His frequent calls at Aunt
Pitty's house were the greatest humiliation of all.  Frank had
always disliked him, even when he had done business with him before
the war.  He often cursed the day he had brought Rhett to Twelve
Oaks and introduced him to his friends.  He despised him for the
cold-blooded way he had acted in his speculations during the war
and for the fact that he had not been in the army.  Rhett's eight
months' service with the Confederacy was known only to Scarlett,
for Rhett had begged her, with mock fear, not to reveal his "shame"
to anyone.  Most of all Frank had contempt for him for holding on
to the Confederate gold, when honest men like Admiral Bulloch and
others confronted with the same situation had turned back thousands
to the Federal treasury.  But whether Frank liked it or not, Rhett
was a frequent caller.

Ostensibly it was Miss Pitty he came to see and she had no better
sense than to believe it and give herself airs over his visits.
But Frank had an uncomfortable feeling that Miss Pitty was not the
attraction which brought him.  Little Wade was very fond of him,
though the boy was shy of most people, and even called him "Uncle
Rhett," which annoyed Frank.  And Frank could not help remembering
that Rhett had squired Scarlett about during the war days and there
had been talk about them then.  He imagined there might be even
worse talk about them now.  None of his friends had the courage to
mention anything of this sort to Frank, for all their outspoken
words on Scarlett's conduct in the matter of the mill.  But he
could not help noticing that he and Scarlett were less frequently
invited to meals and parties and fewer and fewer people came to
call on them.  Scarlett disliked most of her neighbors and was too
busy with her mill to care about seeing the ones she did like, so
the lack of calls did not disturb her.  But Frank felt it keenly.

All of his life, Frank had been under the domination of the phrase
"What will the neighbors say?" and he was defenseless against the
shocks of his wife's repeated disregard of the proprieties.  He
felt that everyone disapproved of Scarlett and was contemptuous of
him for permitting her to "unsex herself."  She did so many things
a husband should not permit, according to his views, but if he
ordered her to stop them, argued or even criticized, a storm broke
on his head.

"My!  My!" he thought helplessly.  "She can get mad quicker and
stay mad longer than any woman I ever saw!"

Even at the times when things were most pleasant, it was amazing
how completely and how quickly the teasing, affectionate wife who
hummed to herself as she went about the house could be transformed
into an entirely different person.  He had only to say:  "Sugar, if
I were you, I wouldn't--" and the tempest would break.

Her black brows rushed together to meet in a sharp angle over her
nose and Frank cowered, almost visibly.  She had the temper of a
Tartar and the rages of a wild cat and, at such times, she did not
seem to care what she said or how much it hurt.  Clouds of gloom
hung over the house on such occasions.  Frank went early to the
store and stayed late.  Pitty scrambled into her bedroom like a
rabbit panting for its burrow.  Wade and Uncle Peter retired to the
carriage house and Cookie kept to her kitchen and forebore to raise
her voice to praise the Lord in song.  Only Mammy endured
Scarlett's temper with equanimity and Mammy had had many years of
training with Gerald O'Hara and his explosions.

Scarlett did not mean to be short tempered and she really wanted to
make Frank a good wife, for she was fond of him and grateful for
his help in saving Tara.  But he did try her patience to the
breaking point so often and in so many different ways.

She could never respect a man who let her run over him and the
timid, hesitant attitude he displayed in any unpleasant situation,
with her or with others, irritated her unbearably.  But she could
have overlooked these things and even been happy, now that some of
her money problems were being solved, except for her constantly
renewed exasperation growing out of the many incidents which showed
that Frank was neither a good business man nor did he want her to
be a good business man.

As she expected, he had refused to collect the unpaid bills until
she prodded him into it, and then he had done it apologetically and
half heartedly.  That experience was the final evidence she needed
to show her that the Kennedy family would never have more than a
bare living, unless she personally made the money she was
determined to have.  She knew now that Frank would be contented to
dawdle along with his dirty little store for the rest of his life.
He didn't seem to realize what a slender fingerhold they had on
security and how important it was to make more money in these
troublous times when money was the only protection against fresh
calamities.

Frank might have been a successful business man in the easy days
before the war but he was so annoyingly old-fashioned, she thought,
and so stubborn about wanting to do things in the old ways, when
the old ways and the old days were gone.  He was utterly lacking in
the aggressiveness needed in these new bitter times.  Well, she had
the aggressiveness and she intended to use it, whether Frank liked
it or not.  They needed money and she was making money and it was
hard work.  The very least Frank could do, in her opinion, was not
to interfere with her plans which were getting results.

With her inexperience, operating the new mill was no easy job and
competition was keener now than it had been at first, so she was
usually tired and worried and cross when she came home at nights.
And when Frank would cough apologetically and say:  "Sugar, I
wouldn't do this," or "I wouldn't do that, Sugar, if I were you,"
it was all she could do to restrain herself from flying into a
rage, and frequently she did not restrain herself.  If he didn't
have the gumption to get out and make some money, why was he always
finding fault with her?  And the things he nagged her about were so
silly!  What difference did it make in times like these if she was
being unwomanly?  Especially when her unwomanly sawmill was
bringing in money they needed so badly, she and the family and
Tara, and Frank too.

Frank wanted rest and quiet.  The war in which he had served so
conscientiously had wrecked his health, cost him his fortune and
made him an old man.  He regretted none of these things and after
four years of war, all he asked of life was peace and kindliness,
loving faces about him and the approval of friends.  He soon found
that domestic peace had its price, and that price was letting
Scarlett have her own way, no matter what she might wish to do.
So, because he was tired, he bought peace at her own terms.
Sometimes, he thought it was worth it to have her smiling when she
opened the front door in the cold twilights, kissing him on the ear
or the nose or some other inappropriate place, to feel her head
snuggling drowsily on his shoulder at night under warm quilts.
Home life could be so pleasant when Scarlett was having her own
way.  But the peace he gained was hollow, only an outward
semblance, for he had purchased it at the cost of everything he
held to be right in married life.

"A woman ought to pay more attention to her home and her family and
not be gadding about like a man," he thought.  "Now, if she just
had a baby--"

He smiled when he thought of a baby and he thought of a baby very
often.  Scarlett had been most outspoken about not wanting a child,
but then babies seldom waited to be invited.  Frank knew that many
women said they didn't want babies but that was all foolishness and
fear.  If Scarlett had a baby, she would love it and be content to
stay home and tend it like other women.  Then she would be forced
to sell the mill and his problems would be ended.  All women needed
babies to make them completely happy and Frank knew that Scarlett
was not happy.  Ignorant as he was of women, he was not so blind
that he could not see she was unhappy at times.

Sometimes he awoke at night and heard the soft sound of tears
muffled in the pillow.  The first time he had waked to feel the bed
shaking with her sobbing, he had questioned, in alarm:  "Sugar,
what is it?" and had been rebuked by a passionate cry:  "Oh, let me
alone!"

Yes, a baby would make her happy and would take her mind off things
she had no business fooling with.  Sometimes Frank sighed, thinking
he had caught a tropic bird, all flame and jewel color, when a wren
would have served him just as well.  In fact, much better.



CHAPTER XXXVII


It was on a wild wet night in April that Tony Fontaine rode in from
Jonesboro on a lathered horse that was half dead from exhaustion
and came knocking at their door, rousing her and Frank from sleep
with their hearts in their throats.  Then for the second time in
four months, Scarlett was made to feel acutely what Reconstruction
in all its implications meant, made to understand more completely
what was in Will's mind when he said "Our troubles have just
begun," to know that the bleak words of Ashley, spoken in the wind-
swept orchard of Tara, were true:  "This that's facing all of us is
worse than war--worse than prison--worse than death."

The first time she had come face to face with Reconstruction was
when she learned that Jonas Wilkerson with the aid of the Yankees
could evict her from Tara.  But Tony's advent brought it all home
to her in a far more terrifying manner.  Tony came in the dark and
the lashing rain and in a few minutes he was gone back into the
night forever, but in the brief interval between he raised the
curtain on a scene of new horror, a curtain that she felt
hopelessly would never be lowered again.

That stormy night when the knocker hammered on the door with such
hurried urgency, she stood on the landing, clutching her wrapper to
her and, looking down into the hall below, had one glimpse of
Tony's swarthy saturnine face before he leaned forward and blew out
the candle in Frank's hand.  She hurried down in the darkness to
grasp his cold wet hand and hear him whisper:  "They're after me--
going to Texas--my horse is about dead--and I'm about starved.
Ashley said you'd--  Don't light the candle!  Don't wake the
darkies. . . .  I don't want to get you folks in trouble if I can
help it."

With the kitchen blinds drawn and all the shades pulled down to the
sills, he permitted a light and he talked to Frank in swift jerky
sentences as Scarlett hurried about, trying to scrape together a
meal for him.

He was without a greatcoat and soaked to the skin.  He was hatless
and his black hair was plastered to his little skull.  But the
merriment of the Fontaine boys, a chilling merriment that night,
was in his little dancing eyes as he gulped down the whisky she
brought him.  Scarlett thanked God that Aunt Pittypat was snoring
undisturbed upstairs.  She would certainly swoon if she saw this
apparition.

"One damned bast--Scallawag less," said Tony, holding out his glass
for another drink.  "I've ridden hard and it'll cost me my skin if
I don't get out of here quick, but it was worth it.  By God, yes!
I'm going to try to get to Texas and lay low there.  Ashley was
with me in Jonesboro and he told me to come to you all.  Got to
have another horse, Frank, and some money.  My horse is nearly
dead--all the way up here at a dead run--and like a fool I went out
of the house today like a bat out of hell without a coat or hat or
a cent of money.  Not that there's much money in our house."

He laughed and applied himself hungrily to the cold corn pone and
cold turnip greens on which congealed grease was thick in white
flakes.

"You can have my horse," said Frank calmly.  "I've only ten dollars
with me but if you can wait till morning--"

"Hell's afire, I can't wait!" said Tony, emphatically but jovially.
"They're probably right behind me.  I didn't get much of a start.
If it hadn't been for Ashley dragging me out of there and making me
get on my horse, I'd have stayed there like a fool and probably had
my neck stretched by now.  Good fellow, Ashley."

So Ashley was mixed up in this frightening puzzle.  Scarlett went
cold, her hand at her throat.  Did the Yankees have Ashley now?
Why, why didn't Frank ask what it was all about?  Why did he take
it all so coolly, so much as a matter of course?  She struggled to
get the question to her lips.

"What--" she began.  "Who--"

"Your father's old overseer--that damned--Jonas Wilkerson."

"Did you--is he dead?"

"My God, Scarlett O'Hara!" said Tony peevishly.  "When I start out
to cut somebody up, you don't think I'd be satisfied with
scratching him with the blunt side of my knife, do you?  No, by
God, I cut him to ribbons."

"Good," said Frank casually.  "I never liked the fellow."

Scarlett looked at him.  This was not the meek Frank she knew, the
nervous beard clawer who she had learned could be bullied with such
ease.  There was an air about him that was crisp and cool and he
was meeting the emergency with no unnecessary words.  He was a man
and Tony was a man and this situation of violence was men's
business in which a woman had no part.

"But Ashley--  Did he--"

"No.  He wanted to kill him but I told him it was my right, because
Sally is my sister-in-law, and he saw reason finally.  He went into
Jonesboro with me, in case Wilkerson got me first.  But I don't
think old Ash will get in any trouble about it.  I hope not.  Got
any jam for this corn pone?  And can you wrap me up something to
take with me?"

"I shall scream if you don't tell me everything."

"Wait till I've gone and then scream if you've got to.  I'll tell
you about it while Frank saddles the horse.  That damned--Wilkerson
has caused enough trouble already.  I know how he did you about
your taxes.  That's just one of his meannesses.  But the worst
thing was the way he kept the darkies stirred up.  If anybody had
told me I'd ever live to see the day when I'd hate darkies!  Damn
their black souls, they believe anything those scoundrels tell them
and forget every living thing we've done for them.  Now the Yankees
are talking about letting the darkies vote.  And they won't let us
vote.  Why, there's hardly a handful of Democrats in the whole
County who aren't barred from voting, now that they've ruled out
every man who fought in the Confederate Army.  And if they give the
negroes the vote, it's the end of us.  Damn it, it's our state!  It
doesn't belong to the Yankees!  By God, Scarlett, it isn't to be
borne!  And it won't be borne!  We'll do something about it if it
means another war.  Soon we'll be having nigger judges, nigger
legislators--black apes out of the jungle--"

"Please--hurry, tell me!  What did you do?"

"Give me another mite of that pone before you wrap it up.  Well,
the word got around that Wilkerson had gone a bit too far with his
nigger-equality business.  Oh, yes, he talks it to those black
fools by the hour.  He had the gall--the--" Tony spluttered
helplessly, "to say niggers had a right to--to--white women."

"Oh, Tony, no!"

"By God, yes!  I don't wonder you look sick.  But hell's afire,
Scarlett, it can't be news to you.  They've been telling it to them
here in Atlanta."

"I--I didn't know."

"Well, Frank would have kept it from you.  Anyway, after that, we
all sort of thought we'd call on Mr. Wilkerson privately by night
and tend to him, but before we could--  You remember that black
buck, Eustis, who used to be our foreman?"

"Yes."

"Came to the kitchen door today while Sally was fixing dinner and--
I don't know what he said to her.  I guess I'll never know now.
But he said something and I heard her scream and I ran into the
kitchen and there he was, drunk as a fiddler's bitch--I beg your
pardon, Scarlett, it just slipped out."

"Go on."

"I shot him and when Mother ran in to take care of Sally, I got my
horse and started to Jonesboro for Wilkerson.  He was the one to
blame.  The damned black fool would never have thought of it but
for him.  And on the way past Tara, I met Ashley and, of course,
he went with me.  He said to let him do it because of the way
Wilkerson acted about Tara and I said No, it was my place because
Sally was my own dead brother's wife, and he went with me arguing
the whole way.  And when we got to town, by God, Scarlett, do you
know I hadn't even brought my pistol, I'd left it in the stable.
So mad I forgot--"

He paused and gnawed the tough pone and Scarlett shivered.  The
murderous rages of the Fontaines had made County history long
before this chapter had opened.

"So I had to take my knife to him.  I found him in the barroom.  I
got him in a corner with Ashley holding back the others and I told
him why before I lit into him.  Why, it was over before I knew it,"
said Tony reflecting.  "First thing I knew, Ashley had me on my
horse and told me to come to you folks.  Ashley's a good man in a
pinch.  He keeps his head."

Frank came in, his greatcoat over his arm, and handed it to Tony.
It was his only heavy coat but Scarlett made no protest.  She
seemed so much on the outside of this affair, this purely masculine
affair.

"But Tony--they need you at home.  Surely, if you went back and
explained--"

"Frank, you've married a fool," said Tony with a grin, struggling
into the coat.  "She thinks the Yankees will reward a man for
keeping niggers off his women folks.  So they will, with a drumhead
court and a rope.  Give me a kiss, Scarlett.  Frank won't mind and
I may never see you again.  Texas is a long way off.  I won't dare
write, so let the home folks know I got this far in safety."

She let him kiss her and the two men went out into the driving rain
and stood for a moment, talking on the back porch.  Then she heard
a sudden splashing of hooves and Tony was gone.  She opened the
door a crack and saw Frank leading a heaving, stumbling horse into
the carriage house.  She shut the door again and sat down, her
knees trembling.

Now she knew what Reconstruction meant, knew as well as if the
house were ringed about by naked savages, squatting in breech
clouts.  Now there came rushing to her mind many things to which
she had given little thought recently, conversations she had heard
but to which she had not listened, masculine talk which had been
checked half finished when she came into rooms, small incidents in
which she had seen no significance at the time, Frank's futile
warnings to her against driving out to the mill with only the
feeble Uncle Peter to protect her.  Now they fitted themselves
together into one horrifying picture.

The negroes were on top and behind them were the Yankee bayonets.
She could be killed, she could be raped and, very probably, nothing
would ever be done about it.  And anyone who avenged her would be
hanged by the Yankees, hanged without benefit of trial by judge and
jury.  Yankee officers who knew nothing of law and cared less for
the circumstances of the crime could go through the motions of
holding a trial and put a rope around a Southerner's neck.

"What can we do?" she thought, wringing her hands in an agony of
helpless fear.  "What can we do with devils who'd hang a nice boy
like Tony just for killing a drunken buck and a scoundrelly
Scallawag to protect his women folks?"

"It isn't to be borne!" Tony had cried and he was right.  It
couldn't be borne.  But what could they do except bear it, helpless
as they were?  She fell to trembling and, for the first time in her
life, she saw people and events as something apart from herself,
saw clearly that Scarlett O'Hara, frightened and helpless, was not
all that mattered.  There were thousands of women like her, all
over the South, who were frightened and helpless.  And thousands of
men, who had laid down their arms at Appomattox, had taken them up
again and stood ready to risk their necks on a minute's notice to
protect those women.

There had been something in Tony's face which had been mirrored in
Frank's, an expression she had seen recently on the faces of other
men in Atlanta, a look she had noticed but had not troubled to
analyze.  It was an expression vastly different from the tired
helplessness she had seen in the faces of men coming home from the
war after the surrender.  Those men had not cared about anything
except getting home.  Now they were caring about something again,
numbed nerves were coming back to life and the old spirit was
beginning to burn.  They were caring again with a cold ruthless
bitterness.  And, like Tony, they were thinking:  "It isn't to be
borne!"

She had seen Southern men, soft voiced and dangerous in the days
before the war, reckless and hard in the last despairing days of
the fighting.  But in the faces of the two men who stared at each
other across the candle flame so short a while ago there had been
something that was different, something that heartened her but
frightened her--fury which could find no words, determination which
would stop at nothing.

For the first time, she felt a kinship with the people about her,
felt one with them in their fears, their bitterness, their
determination.  No, it wasn't to be borne!  The South was too
beautiful a place to be let go without a struggle, too loved to be
trampled by Yankees who hated Southerners enough to enjoy grinding
them into the dirt, too dear a homeland to be turned over to
ignorant negroes drunk with whisky and freedom.

As she thought of Tony's sudden entrance and swift exit, she felt
herself akin to him, for she remembered the old story how her
father had left Ireland, left hastily and by night, after a murder
which was no murder to him or to his family.  Gerald's blood was in
her, violent blood.  She remembered her hot joy in shooting the
marauding Yankee.  Violent blood was in them all, perilously close
to the surface, lurking just beneath the kindly courteous
exteriors.  All of them, all the men she knew, even the drowsy-eyed
Ashley and fidgety old Frank, were like that underneath--murderous,
violent if the need arose.  Even Rhett, conscienceless scamp that
he was, had killed a negro for being "uppity to a lady."

"Oh, Frank, how long will it be like this?" she leaped to her feet.

"As long as the Yankees hate us so, Sugar."

"Is there nothing anybody can do?"

Frank passed a tired hand over his wet beard.  "We are doing
things."

"What?"

"Why talk of them till we have accomplished something?  It may take
years.  Perhaps--perhaps the South will always be like this."

"Oh, no!"

"Sugar, come to bed.  You must be chilled.  You are shaking."

"When will it all end?"

"When we can all vote again, Sugar.  When every man who fought for
the South can put a ballot in the box for a Southerner and a
Democrat."

"A ballot?" she cried despairingly.  "What good's a ballot when the
darkies have lost their minds--when the Yankees have poisoned them
against us?"

Frank went on to explain in his patient manner, but the idea that
ballots could cure the trouble was too complicated for her to
follow.  She was thinking gratefully that Jonas Wilkerson would
never again be a menace of Tara and she was thinking about Tony.

"Oh, the poor Fontaines!" she exclaimed.  "Only Alex left and so
much to do at Mimosa.  Why didn't Tony have sense enough to--to do
it at night when no one would know who it was?  A sight more good
he'd do helping with the spring plowing than in Texas."

Frank put an arm about her.  Usually he was gingerly when he did
this, as if he anticipated being impatiently shaken off, but
tonight there was a far-off look in his eyes and his arm was firm
about her waist.

"There are things more important now than plowing, Sugar.  And
scaring the darkies and teaching the Scallawags a lesson is one of
them.  As long as there are fine boys like Tony left, I guess we
won't need to worry about the South too much.  Come to bed."

"But, Frank--"

"If we just stand together and don't give an inch to the Yankees,
we'll win, some day.  Don't you bother your pretty head about it,
Sugar.  You let your men folks worry about it.  Maybe it won't come
in our time, but surely it will come some day.  The Yankees will
get tired of pestering us when they see they can't even dent us,
and then we'll have a decent world to live in and raise our
children in."

She thought of Wade and the secret she had carried silently for
some days.  No, she didn't want her children raised in this welter
of hate and uncertainty, of bitterness and violence lurking just
below the surface, of poverty and grinding hardships and
insecurity.  She never wanted children of hers to know what all
this was like.  She wanted a secure and well-ordered world in which
she could look forward and know there was a safe future ahead for
them, a world where her children would know only softness and
warmth and good clothes and fine food.

Frank thought this could be accomplished by voting.  Voting?  What
did votes matter?  Nice people in the South would never have the
vote again.  There was only one thing in the world that was a
certain bulwark against any calamity which fate could bring, and
that was money.  She thought feverishly that they must have money,
lots of it to keep them safe against disaster.

Abruptly, she told him she was going to have a baby.



For weeks after Tony's escape, Aunt Pitty's house was subjected to
repeated searches by parties of Yankee soldiers.  They invaded the
house at all hours and without warning.  They swarmed through the
rooms, asking questions, opening closets, prodding clothes hampers,
peering under beds.  The military authorities had heard that Tony
had been advised to go to Miss Pitty's house, and they were certain
he was still hiding there or somewhere in the neighborhood.

As a result, Aunt Pitty was chronically in what Uncle Peter called
a "state," never knowing when her bedroom would be entered by an
officer and a squad of men.  Neither Frank nor Scarlett had
mentioned Tony's brief visit, so the old lady could have revealed
nothing, even had she been so inclined.  She was entirely honest in
her fluttery protestations that she had seen Tony Fontaine only
once in her life and that was at Christmas time in 1862.

"And," she would add breathlessly to the Yankee soldiers, in an
effort to be helpful, "he was quite intoxicated at the time."

Scarlett, sick and miserable in the early stage of pregnancy,
alternated between a passionate hatred of the bluecoats who invaded
her privacy, frequently carrying away any little knick-knack that
appealed to them, and an equally passionate fear that Tony might
prove the undoing of them all.  The prisons were full of people who
had been arrested for much less reason.  She knew that if one iota
of the truth were proved against them, not only she and Frank but
the innocent Pitty as well would go to jail.

For some time there had been an agitation in Washington to
confiscate all "Rebel property" to pay the United States' war debt
and this agitation had kept Scarlett in a state of anguished
apprehension.  Now, in addition to this, Atlanta was full of wild
rumors about the confiscation of property of offenders against
military law, and Scarlett quaked lest she and Frank lose not only
their freedom but the house, the store and the mill.  And even if
their property were not appropriated by the military, it would be
as good as lost if she and Frank went to jail, for who would look
after their business in their absence?

She hated Tony for bringing such trouble upon them.  How could he
have done such a thing to friends?  And how could Ashley have sent
Tony to them?  Never again would she give aid to anyone if it meant
having the Yankees come down on her like a swarm of hornets.  No,
she would bar the door against anyone needing help.  Except, of
course, Ashley.  For weeks after Tony's brief visit she woke from
uneasy dreams at any sound in the road outside, fearing it might be
Ashley trying to make his escape, fleeing to Texas because of the
aid he had given Tony.  She did not know how matters stood with
him, for they did not dare write to Tara about Tony's midnight
visit.  Their letters might be intercepted by the Yankees and bring
trouble upon the plantation as well.  But, when weeks went by and
they heard no bad news, they knew that Ashley had somehow come
clear.  And finally, the Yankees ceased annoying them.

But even this relief did not free Scarlett from the state of dread
which began when Tony came knocking at their door, a dread which
was worse than the quaking fear of the siege shells, worse even
than the terror of Sherman's men during the last days of the war.
It was as if Tony's appearance that wild rainy night had stripped
merciful blinders from her eyes and forced her to see the true
uncertainty of her life.

Looking about her in that cold spring of 1866, Scarlett realized
what was facing her and the whole South.  She might plan and
scheme, she might work harder than her slaves had ever worked, she
might succeed in overcoming all of her hardships, she might through
dint of determination solve problems for which her earlier life had
provided no training at all.  But for all her labor and sacrifice
and resourcefulness, her small beginnings purchased at so great a
cost might be snatched away from her at any minute.  And should
this happen, she had no legal rights, no legal redress, except
those same drumhead courts of which Tony had spoken so bitterly,
those military courts with their arbitrary powers.  Only the
negroes had rights or redress these days.  The Yankees had the
South prostrate and they intended to keep it so.  The South had
been tilted as by a giant malicious hand, and those who had once
ruled were now more helpless than their former slaves had ever
been.

Georgia was heavily garrisoned with troops and Atlanta had more
than its share.  The commandants of the Yankee troops in the
various cities had complete power, even the power of life and
death, over the civilian population, and they used that power.
They could and did imprison citizens for any cause, or no cause,
seize their property, hang them.  They could and did harass and
hamstring them with conflicting regulations about the operation of
their business, the wages they must pay their servants, what they
should say in public and private utterances and what they should
write in newspapers.  They regulated how, when and where they must
dump their garbage and they decided what songs the daughters and
wives of ex-Confederates could sing, so that the singing of "Dixie"
or "Bonnie Blue Flag" became an offense only a little less serious
than treason.  They ruled that no one could get a letter out of the
post office without taking the Iron Clad oath and, in some
instances, they even prohibited the issuance of marriage licenses
unless the couples had taken the hated oath.

The newspapers were so muzzled that no public protest could be
raised against the injustices or depredations of the military, and
individual protests were silenced with jail sentences.  The jails
were full of prominent citizens and there they stayed without hope
of early trial.  Trial by jury and the law of habeas corpus were
practically suspended.  The civil courts still functioned after a
fashion but they functioned at the pleasure of the military, who
could and did interfere with their verdicts, so that citizens so
unfortunate as to get arrested were virtually at the mercy of the
military authorities.  And so many did get arrested.  The very
suspicion of seditious utterances against the government, suspected
complicity in the Ku Klux Klan, or complaint by a negro that a
white man had been uppity to him were enough to land a citizen in
jail.  Proof and evidence were not needed.  The accusation was
sufficient.  And thanks to the incitement of the Freedmen's Bureau,
negroes could always be found who were willing to bring accusations.

The negroes had not yet been given the right to vote but the North
was determined that they should vote and equally determined that
their vote should be friendly to the North.  With this in mind,
nothing was too good for the negroes.  The Yankee soldiers backed
them up in anything they chose to do, and the surest way for a
white person to get himself into trouble was to bring a complaint
of any kind against a negro.

The former slaves were now the lords of creation and, with the aid
of the Yankees, the lowest and most ignorant ones were on top.  The
better class of them, scorning freedom, were suffering as severely
as their white masters.  Thousands of house servants, the highest
caste in the slave population, remained with their white folks,
doing manual labor which had been beneath them in the old days.
Many loyal field hands also refused to avail themselves of the new
freedom, but the hordes of "trashy free issue niggers," who were
causing most of the trouble, were drawn largely from the field-hand
class.

In slave days, these lowly blacks had been despised by the house
negroes and yard negroes as creatures of small worth.  Just as
Ellen had done, other plantation mistresses throughout the South
had put the pickaninnies through courses of training and
elimination to select the best of them for the positions of greater
responsibility.  Those consigned to the fields were the ones least
willing or able to learn, the least energetic, the least honest and
trustworthy, the most vicious and brutish.  And now this class, the
lowest in the black social order, was making life a misery for the
South.

Aided by the unscrupulous adventurers who operated the Freedmen's
Bureau and urged on by a fervor of Northern hatred almost religious
in its fanaticism, the former field hands found themselves suddenly
elevated to the seats of the mighty.  There they conducted
themselves as creatures of small intelligence might naturally be
expected to do.  Like monkeys or small children turned loose among
treasured objects whose value is beyond their comprehension, they
ran wild--either from perverse pleasure in destruction or simply
because of their ignorance.

To the credit of the negroes, including the least intelligent of
them, few were actuated by malice and those few had usually been
"mean niggers" even in slave days.  But they were, as a class,
childlike in mentality, easily led and from long habit accustomed
to taking orders.  Formerly their white masters had given the
orders.  Now they had a new set of masters, the Bureau and the
Carpetbaggers, and their orders were:  "You're just as good as any
white man, so act that way.  Just as soon as you can vote the
Republican ticket, you are going to have the white man's property.
It's as good as yours now.  Take it, if you can get it!"

Dazzled by these tales, freedom became a never-ending picnic, a
barbecue every day of the week, a carnival of idleness and theft
and insolence.  Country negroes flocked into the cities, leaving
the rural districts without labor to make the crops.  Atlanta was
crowded with them and still they came by the hundreds, lazy and
dangerous as a result of the new doctrines being taught them.
Packed into squalid cabins, smallpox, typhoid and tuberculosis
broke out among them.  Accustomed to the care of their mistresses
when they were ill in slave days, they did not know how to nurse
themselves or their sick.  Relying upon their masters in the old
days to care for their aged and their babies, they now had no sense
of responsibility for their helpless.  And the Bureau was far too
interested in political matters to provide the care the plantation
owners had once given.

Abandoned negro children ran like frightened animals about the town
until kind-hearted white people took them into their kitchens to
raise.  Aged country darkies, deserted by their children,
bewildered and panic stricken in the bustling town, sat on the
curbs and cried to the ladies who passed:  "Mistis, please Ma'm,
write mah old Marster down in Fayette County dat Ah's up hyah.
He'll come tek dis ole nigger home agin.  'Fo' Gawd, Ah done got
nuff of dis freedom!"

The Freedmen's Bureau, overwhelmed by the numbers who poured in
upon them, realized too late a part of the mistake and tried to
send them back to their former owners.  They told the negroes that
if they would go back, they would go as free workers, protected by
written contracts specifying wages by the day.  The old darkies
went back to the plantations gladly, making a heavier burden than
ever on the poverty-stricken planters who had not the heart to turn
them out, but the young ones remained in Atlanta.  They did not
want to be workers of any kind, anywhere.  Why work when the belly
is full?

For the first time in their lives the negroes were able to get all
the whisky they might want.  In slave days, it was something they
never tasted except at Christmas, when each one received a "drap"
along with his gift.  Now they had not only the Bureau agitators
and the Carpetbaggers urging them on, but the incitement of whisky
as well, and outrages were inevitable.  Neither life nor property
was safe from them and the white people, unprotected by law, were
terrorized.  Men were insulted on the streets by drunken blacks,
houses and barns were burned at night, horses and cattle and
chickens stolen in broad daylight, crimes of all varieties were
committed and few of the perpetrators were brought to justice.

But these ignominies and dangers were as nothing compared with the
peril of white women, many bereft by the war of male protection,
who lived alone in the outlying districts and on lonely roads.  It
was the large number of outrages on women and the ever-present fear
for the safety of their wives and daughters that drove Southern men
to cold and trembling fury and caused the Ku Klux Klan to spring up
overnight.  And it was against this nocturnal organization that the
newspapers of the North cried out most loudly, never realizing the
tragic necessity that brought it into being.  The North wanted
every member of the Ku Klux hunted down and hanged, because they
had dared take the punishment of crime into their own hands at a
time when the ordinary processes of law and order had been
overthrown by the invaders.

Here was the astonishing spectacle of half a nation attempting, at
the point of bayonet, to force upon the other half the rule of
negroes, many of them scarcely one generation out of the African
jungles.  The vote must be given to them but it must be denied to
most of their former owners.  The South must be kept down and
disfranchisement of the whites was one way to keep the South down.
Most of those who had fought for the Confederacy, held office under
it or given aid and comfort to it were not allowed to vote, had no
choice in the selection of their public officials and were wholly
under the power of an alien rule.  Many men, thinking soberly of
General Lee's words and example, wished to take the oath, become
citizens again and forget the past.  But they were not permitted to
take it.  Others who were permitted to take the oath, hotly refused
to do so, scorning to swear allegiance to a government which was
deliberately subjecting them to cruelty and humiliation.

Scarlett heard over and over until she could have screamed at the
repetition:  "I'd have taken their damned oath right after the
surrender if they'd acted decent.  I can be restored to the Union,
but by God, I can't be reconstructed into it!"

Through these anxious days and nights, Scarlett was torn with fear.
The ever-present menace of lawless negroes and Yankee soldiers
preyed on her mind, the danger of confiscation was constantly with
her, even in her dreams, and she dreaded worse terrors to come.
Depressed by the helplessness of herself and her friends, of the
whole South, it was not strange that she often remembered during
these days the words which Tony Fontaine had spoken so passionately:

"Good God, Scarlett, it isn't to be borne!  And it won't be borne!"



In spite of war, fire and Reconstruction, Atlanta had again become
a boom town.  In many ways, the place resembled the busy young city
of the Confederacy's early days.  The only trouble was that the
soldiers crowding the streets wore the wrong kind of uniforms, the
money was in the hands of the wrong people, and the negroes were
living in leisure while their former masters struggled and starved.

Underneath the surface were misery and fear, but all the outward
appearances were those of a thriving town that was rapidly
rebuilding from its ruins, a bustling, hurrying town.  Atlanta, it
seemed, must always be hurrying, no matter what its circumstances
might be.  Savannah, Charleston, Augusta, Richmond, New Orleans
would never hurry.  It was ill bred and Yankeefied to hurry.  But
in this period, Atlanta was more ill bred and Yankeefied than it
had ever been before or would ever be again.  With "new people"
thronging in from all directions, the streets were choked and noisy
from morning till night.  The shiny carriages of Yankee officers'
wives and newly rich Carpetbaggers splashed mud on the dilapidated
buggies of the townspeople, and gaudy new homes of wealthy
strangers crowded in among the sedate dwellings of older citizens.

The war had definitely established the importance of Atlanta in the
affairs of the South and the hitherto obscure town was now known
far and wide.  The railroads for which Sherman had fought an entire
summer and killed thousands of men were again stimulating the life
of the city they had brought into being.  Atlanta was again the
center of activities for a wide region, as it had been before its
destruction, and the town was receiving a great influx of new
citizens, both welcome and unwelcome.

Invading Carpetbaggers made Atlanta their headquarters and on the
streets they jostled against representatives of the oldest families
in the South who were likewise newcomers in the town.  Families
from the country districts who had been burned out during Sherman's
march and who could no longer make a living without the slaves to
till the cotton had come to Atlanta to live.  New settlers were
coming in every day from Tennessee and the Carolinas where the hand
of Reconstruction lay even heavier than in Georgia.  Many Irish and
Germans who had been bounty men in the Union Army had settled in
Atlanta after their discharge.  The wives and families of the
Yankee garrison, filled with curiosity about the South after four
years of war, came to swell the population.  Adventurers of every
kind swarmed in, hoping to make their fortunes, and the negroes
from the country continued to come by the hundreds.

The town was roaring--wide open like a frontier village, making no
effort to cover its vices and sins.  Saloons blossomed overnight,
two and sometimes three in a block, and after nightfall the streets
were full of drunken men, black and white, reeling from wall to
curb and back again.  Thugs, pickpockets and prostitutes lurked in
the unlit alleys and shadowy streets.  Gambling houses ran full
blast and hardly a night passed without its shooting or cutting
affray.  Respectable citizens were scandalized to find that Atlanta
had a large and thriving red-light district, larger and more
thriving than during the war.  All night long pianos jangled from
behind drawn shades and rowdy songs and laughter floated out,
punctuated by occasional screams and pistol shots.  The inmates of
these houses were bolder than the prostitutes of the war days and
brazenly hung out of their windows and called to passers-by.  And
on Sunday afternoons, the handsome closed carriages of the madams
of the district rolled down the main streets, filled with girls in
their best finery, taking the air from behind lowered silk shades.

Belle Watling was the most notorious of the madams.  She had opened
a new house of her own, a large two-story building that made
neighboring houses in the district look like shabby rabbit warrens.
There was a long barroom downstairs, elegantly hung with oil
paintings, and a negro orchestra played every night.  The upstairs,
so rumor said, was fitted out with the finest of plush upholstered
furniture, heavy lace curtains and imported mirrors in gilt frames.
The dozen young ladies with whom the house was furnished were
comely, if brightly painted, and comported themselves more quietly
than those of other houses.  At least, the police were seldom
summoned to Belle's.

This house was something that the matrons of Atlanta whispered
about furtively and ministers preached against in guarded terms as
a cesspool of iniquity, a hissing and a reproach.  Everyone knew
that a woman of Belle's type couldn't have made enough money by
herself to set up such a luxurious establishment.  She had to have
a backer and a rich one at that.  And Rhett Butler had never had
the decency to conceal his relations with her, so it was obvious
that he and no other must be that backer.  Belle herself presented
a prosperous appearance when glimpsed occasionally in her closed
carriage driven by an impudent yellow negro.  When she drove by,
behind a fine pair of bays, all the little boys along the street
who could evade their mothers ran to peer at her and whisper
excitedly:  "That's her!  That's ole Belle!  I seen her red hair!"

Shouldering the shell-pitted houses patched with bits of old lumber
and smoke-blackened bricks, the fine homes of the Carpetbaggers and
war profiteers were rising, with mansard roofs, gables and turrets,
stained-glass windows and wide lawns.  Night after night, in these
newly built homes, the windows were ablaze with gas light and the
sound of music and dancing feet drifted out upon the air.  Women in
stiff bright-colored silks strolled about long verandas, squired by
men in evening clothes.  Champagne corks popped, and on lace
tablecloths seven-course dinners were laid.  Hams in wine, pressed
duck, pate de foie gras, rare fruits in and out of season, were
spread in profusion.

Behind the shabby doors of the old houses, poverty and hunger
lived--all the more bitter for the brave gentility with which they
were borne, all the more pinching for the outward show of proud
indifference to material wants.  Dr. Meade could tell unlovely
stories of those families who had been driven from mansions to
boarding houses and from boarding houses to dingy rooms on back
streets.  He had too many lady patients who were suffering from
"weak hearts" and "declines."  He knew, and they knew he knew, that
slow starvation was the trouble.  He could tell of consumption
making inroads on entire families and of pellagra, once found only
among poor whites, which was now appearing in Atlanta's best
families.  And there were babies with thin rickety legs and mothers
who could not nurse them.  Once the old doctor had been wont to
thank God reverently for each child he brought into the world.  Now
he did not think life was such a boon.  It was a hard world for
little babies and so many died in their first few months of life.

Bright lights and wine, fiddles and dancing, brocade and broadcloth
in the showy big houses and, just around the corners, slow
starvation and cold.  Arrogance and callousness for the conquerors,
bitter endurance and hatred for the conquered.



