CHAPTER XI


On an afternoon of the following week, Scarlett came home from the
hospital weary and indignant.  She was tired from standing on her
feet all morning and irritable because Mrs. Merriwether had
scolded her sharply for sitting on a soldier's bed while she
dressed his wounded arm.  Aunt Pitty and Melanie, bonneted in
their best, were on the porch with Wade and Prissy, ready for
their weekly round of calls.  Scarlett asked to be excused from
accompanying them and went upstairs to her room.

When the last sound of carriage wheels had died away and she knew
the family was safely out of sight, she slipped quietly into
Melanie's room and turned the key in the lock.  It was a prim,
virginal little room and it lay still and warm in the slanting
rays of the four-o'clock sun.  The floors were glistening and bare
except for a few bright rag rugs, and the white walls unornamented
save for one corner which Melanie had fitted up as a shrine.

Here, under a draped Confederate flag, hung the gold-hilted saber
that Melanie's father had carried in the Mexican War, the same
saber Charles had worn away to war.  Charles' sash and pistol belt
hung there too, with his revolver in the holster.  Between the
saber and the pistol was a daguerreotype of Charles himself, very
stiff and proud in his gray uniform, his great brown eyes shining
out of the frame and a shy smile on his lips.

Scarlett did not even glance at the picture but went unhesitatingly
across the room to the square rosewood writing box that stood on the
table beside the narrow bed.  From it she took a pack of letters
tied together with a blue ribbon, addressed in Ashley's hand to
Melanie.  On the top was the letter which had come that morning and
this one she opened.

When Scarlett first began secretly reading these letters, she had
been so stricken of conscience and so fearful of discovery she
could hardly open the envelopes for trembling.  Now, her never-
too-scrupulous sense of honor was dulled by repetition of the
offense and even fear of discovery had subsided.  Occasionally,
she thought with a sinking heart, "What would Mother say if she
knew?"  She knew Ellen would rather see her dead than know her
guilty of such dishonor.  This had worried Scarlett at first, for
she still wanted to be like her mother in every respect.  But the
temptation to read the letters was too great and she put the
thought of Ellen out of her mind.  She had become adept at putting
unpleasant thoughts out of her mind these days.  She had learned
to say, "I won't think of this or that bothersome thought now.
I'll think about it tomorrow."  Generally when tomorrow came, the
thought either did not occur at all or it was so attenuated by the
delay it was not very troublesome.  So the matter of Ashley's
letters did not lie very heavily on her conscience.

Melanie was always generous with the letters, reading parts of
them aloud to Aunt Pitty and Scarlett.  But it was the part she
did not read that tormented Scarlett, that drove her to
surreptitious reading of her sister-in-law's mail.  She had to
know if Ashley had come to love his wife since marrying her.  She
had to know if he even pretended to love her.  Did he address
tender endearments to her?  What sentiments did he express and
with what warmth?

She carefully smoothed out the letter.

Ashley's small even writing leaped up at her as she read, "My dear
wife," and she breathed in relief.  He wasn't calling Melanie
"Darling" or "Sweetheart" yet.

"My Dear wife:  You write me saying you are alarmed lest I be
concealing my real thoughts from you and you ask me what is
occupying my mind these days--"

"Mother of God!" thought Scarlett, in a panic of guilt.
"'Concealing his real thoughts.'  Can Melly have read his mind?
Or my mind?  Does she suspect that he and I--"

Her hands trembled with fright as she held the letter closer, but
as she read the next paragraph she relaxed.

"Dear Wife, if I have concealed aught from you it is because I did
not wish to lay a burden on your shoulders, to add to your worries
for my physical safety with those of my mental turmoil.  But I can
keep nothing from you, for you know me too well.  Do not be
alarmed.  I have no wound.  I have not been ill.  I have enough to
eat and occasionally a bed to sleep in.  A soldier can ask for no
more.  But, Melanie, heavy thoughts lie on my heart and I will
open my heart to you.

"These summer nights I lie awake, long after the camp is sleeping,
and I look up at the stars and, over and over, I wonder, 'Why are
you here, Ashley Wilkes?  What are you fighting for?'

"Not for honor and glory, certainly.  War is a dirty business and
I do not like dirt.  I am not a soldier and I have no desire to
seek the bubble reputation even in the cannon's mouth.  Yet, here
I am at the wars--whom God never intended to be other than a
studious country gentleman.  For, Melanie, bugles do not stir my
blood nor drums entice my feet and I see too clearly that we have
been betrayed, betrayed by our arrogant Southern selves, believing
that one of us could whip a dozen Yankees, believing that King
Cotton could rule the world.  Betrayed, too, by words and catch
phrases, prejudices and hatreds coming from the mouths of those
highly placed, those men whom we respected and revered--'King
Cotton, Slavery, States' Rights, Damn Yankees.'

"And so when I lie on my blanket and look up at the stars and say
'What are you fighting for?' I think of States' Rights and cotton
and the darkies and the Yankees whom we have been bred to hate,
and I know that none of these is the reason why I am fighting.
Instead, I see Twelve Oaks and remember how the moonlight slants
across the white columns, and the unearthly way the magnolias
look, opening under the moon, and how the climbing roses make the
side porch shady even at the hottest noon.  And I see Mother,
sewing there, as she did when I was a little boy.  And I hear the
darkies coming home across the fields at dusk, tired and singing
and ready for supper, and the sound of the windlass as the bucket
goes down into the cool well.  And there's the long view down the
road to the river, across the cotton fields, and the mist rising
from the bottom lands in the twilight.  And that is why I'm here
who have no love of death or misery or glory and no hatred for
anyone.  Perhaps that is what is called patriotism, love of home
and country.  But Melanie, it goes deeper than that.  For,
Melanie, these things I have named are but the symbols of the
thing for which I risk my life, symbols of the kind of life I
love.  For I am fighting for the old days, the old ways I love so
much but which, I fear, are now gone forever, no matter how the
die may fall.  For, win or lose, we lose just the same.

"If we win this war and have the Cotton Kingdom of our dreams, we
still have lost, for we will become a different people and the old
quiet ways will go.  The world will be at our doors clamoring for
cotton and we can command our own price.  Then, I fear, we will
become like the Yankees, at whose money-making activities,
acquisitiveness and commercialism we now sneer.  And if we lose,
Melanie, if we lose!

"I am not afraid of danger or capture or wounds or even death, if
death must come, but I do fear that once this war is over, we will
never get back to the old times.  And I belong in those old times.
I do not belong in this mad present of killing and I fear I will
not fit into any future, try though I may.  Nor will you, my dear,
for you and I are of the same blood.  I do not know what the
future will bring, but it cannot be as beautiful or as satisfying
as the past.

"I lie and look at the boys sleeping near me and I wonder if the
twins or Alex or Cade think these same thoughts.  I wonder if they
know they are fighting for a Cause that was lost the minute the
first shot was fired, for our Cause is really our own way of
living and that is gone already.  But I do not think they think
these things and they are lucky.

"I had not thought of this for us when I asked you to marry me.  I
had thought of life going on at Twelve Oaks as it had always done,
peacefully, easily, unchanging.  We are alike, Melanie, loving the
same quiet things, and I saw before us a long stretch of
uneventful years in which to read, hear music and dream.  But not
this!  Never this!  That this could happen to us all, this
wrecking of old ways, this bloody slaughter and hate!  Melanie,
nothing is worth it--States' Rights, nor slaves, nor cotton.
Nothing is worth what is happening to us now and what may happen,
for if the Yankees whip us the future will be one of incredible
horror.  And, my dear, they may yet whip us.

"I should not write those words.  I should not even think them.
But you have asked me what was in my heart, and the fear of defeat
is there.  Do you remember at the barbecue, the day our engagement
was announced, that a man named Butler, a Charlestonian by his
accent, nearly caused a fight by his remarks about the ignorance
of Southerners?  Do you recall how the twins wanted to shoot him
because he said we had few foundries and factories, mills and
ships, arsenals and machine shops?  Do you recall how he said the
Yankee fleet could bottle us up so tightly we could not ship out
our cotton?  He was right.  We are fighting the Yankees' new
rifles with Revolutionary War muskets, and soon the blockade will
be too tight for even medical supplies to slip in.  We should have
paid heed to cynics like Butler who knew, instead of statesmen who
felt--and talked.  He said, in effect, that the South had nothing
with which to wage war but cotton and arrogance.  Our cotton is
worthless and what he called arrogance is all that is left.  But I
call that arrogance matchless courage.  If--"

But Scarlett carefully folded up the letter without finishing it
and thrust it back into the envelope, too bored to read further.
Besides, the tone of the letter vaguely depressed her with its
foolish talk of defeat.  After all, she wasn't reading Melanie's
mail to learn Ashley's puzzling and uninteresting ideas.  She had
had to listen to enough of them when he sat on the porch at Tara
in days gone by.

All she wanted to know was whether he wrote impassioned letters to
his wife.  So far he had not.  She had read every letter in the
writing box and there was nothing in any one of them that a
brother might not have written to a sister.  They were
affectionate, humorous, discursive, but not the letters of a
lover.  Scarlett had received too many ardent love letters herself
not to recognize the authentic note of passion when she saw it.
And that note was missing.  As always after her secret readings, a
feeling of smug satisfaction enveloped her, for she felt certain
that Ashley still loved her.  And always she wondered sneeringly
why Melanie did not realize that Ashley only loved her as a
friend.  Melanie evidently found nothing lacking in her husband's
messages but Melanie had had no other man's love letters with
which to compare Ashley's."

"He writes such crazy letters," Scarlett thought.  "If ever any
husband of mine wrote me such twaddle-twaddle, he'd certainly hear
from me!  Why, even Charlie wrote better letters than these."

She flipped back the edges of the letters, looking at the dates,
remembering their contents.  In them there were no fine
descriptive pages of bivouacs and charges such as Darcy Meade
wrote his parents or poor Dallas McLure had written his old-maid
sisters, Misses Faith and Hope.  The Meades and McLures proudly
read these letters all over the neighborhood, and Scarlett had
frequently felt a secret shame that Melanie had no such letters
from Ashley to read aloud at sewing circles.

It was as though when writing Melanie, Ashley tried to ignore the
war altogether, and sought to draw about the two of them a magic
circle of timelessness, shutting out everything that had happened
since Fort Sumter was the news of the day.  It was almost as if he
were trying to believe there wasn't any war.  He wrote of books
which he and Melanie had read and songs they had sung, of old
friends they knew and places he had visited on his Grand Tour.
Through the letters ran a wistful yearning to be back home at
Twelve Oaks, and for pages he wrote of the hunting and the long
rides through the still forest paths under frosty autumn stars,
the barbecues, the fish fries, the quiet of moonlight nights and
the serene charm of the old house.

She thought of his words in the letter she had just read:  "Not
this!  Never this!" and they seemed to cry of a tormented soul
facing something he could not face, yet must face.  It puzzled her
for, if he was not afraid of wounds and death, what was it he
feared?  Unanalytical, she struggled with the complex thought.

"The war disturbs him and he--he doesn't like things that disturb
him. . . .  Me, for instance. . . .  He loved me but he was afraid
to marry me because--for fear I'd upset his way of thinking and
living.  No, it wasn't exactly that he was afraid.  Ashley isn't a
coward.  He couldn't be when he's been mentioned in dispatches and
when Colonel Sloan wrote that letter to Melly all about his
gallant conduct in leading the charge.  Once he's made up his mind
to do something, no one could be braver or more determined but--
He lives inside his head instead of outside in the world and he
hates to come out into the world and--  Oh, I don't know what it
is!  If I'd just understood this one thing about him years ago, I
know he'd have married me."

She stood for a moment holding the letters to her breast, thinking
longingly of Ashley.  Her emotions toward him had not changed
since the day when she first fell in love with him.  They were the
same emotions that struck her speechless that day when she was
fourteen years old and she had stood on the porch of Tara and seen
Ashley ride up smiling, his hair shining silver in the morning
sun.  Her love was still a young girl's adoration for a man she
could not understand, a man who possessed all the qualities she
did not own but which she admired.  He was still a young girl's
dream of the Perfect Knight and her dream asked no more than
acknowledgment of his love, went no further than hopes of a kiss.

After reading the letters, she felt certain he did love her,
Scarlett, even though he had married Melanie, and that certainty
was almost all that she desired.  She was still that young and
untouched.  Had Charles with his fumbling awkwardness and his
embarrassed intimacies tapped any of the deep vein of passionate
feeling within her, her dreams of Ashley would not be ending with
a kiss.  But those few moonlight nights alone with Charles had not
touched her emotions or ripened her to maturity.  Charles had
awakened no idea of what passion might be or tenderness or true
intimacy of body or spirit.

All that passion meant to her was servitude to inexplicable male
madness, unshared by females, a painful and embarrassing process
that led inevitably to the still more painful process of
childbirth.  That marriage should be like this was no surprise to
her.  Ellen had hinted before the wedding that marriage was
something women must bear with dignity and fortitude, and the
whispered comments of other matrons since her widowhood had
confirmed this.  Scarlett was glad to be done with passion and
marriage.

She was done with marriage but not with love, for her love for
Ashley was something different, having nothing to do with passion
or marriage, something sacred and breathtakingly beautiful, an
emotion that grew stealthily through the long days of her enforced
silence, feeding on oft-thumbed memories and hopes.

She sighed as she carefully tied the ribbon about the packet,
wondering for the thousandth time just what it was in Ashley that
eluded her understanding.  She tried to think the matter to some
satisfactory conclusion but, as always, the conclusion evaded her
uncomplex mind.  She put the letters back in the lap secretary and
closed the lid.  Then she frowned, for her mind went back to the
last part of the letter she had just read, to his mention of
Captain Butler.  How strange that Ashley should be impressed by
something that scamp had said a year ago.  Undeniably Captain
Butler was a scamp, for all that he danced divinely.  No one but a
scamp would say the things about the Confederacy that he had said
at the bazaar.

She crossed the room to the mirror and patted her smooth hair
approvingly.  Her spirits rose, as always at the sight of her
white skin and slanting green eyes, and she smiled to bring out
her dimples.  Then she dismissed Captain Butler from her mind as
she happily viewed her reflection, remembering how Ashley had
always liked her dimples.  No pang of conscience at loving another
woman's husband or reading that woman's mail disturbed her
pleasure in her youth and charm and her renewed assurance of
Ashley's love.

She unlocked the door and went down the dim winding stair with a
light heart.  Halfway down she began singing "When This Cruel War
Is Over."



CHAPTER XII


The war went on, successfully for the most part, but people had
stopped saying "One more victory and the war is over," just as
they had stopped saying the Yankees were cowards.  It was obvious
to all now that the Yankees were far from cowardly and that it
would take more than one victory to conquer them.  However, there
were the Confederate victories in Tennessee scored by General
Morgan and General Forrest and the triumph at the Second Battle of
Bull Run hung up like visible Yankee scalps to gloat over.  But
there was a heavy price on these scalps.  The hospitals and homes
of Atlanta were overflowing with the sick and wounded, and more
and more women were appearing in black.  The monotonous rows of
soldiers' graves at Oakland Cemetery stretched longer every day.

Confederate money had dropped alarmingly and the price of food and
clothing had risen accordingly.  The commissary was laying such
heavy levies on foodstuffs that the tables of Atlanta were
beginning to suffer.  White flour was scarce and so expensive that
corn bread was universal instead of biscuits, rolls and waffles.
The butcher shops carried almost no beef and very little mutton,
and that mutton cost so much only the rich could afford it.
However there was still plenty of hog meat, as well as chickens
and vegetables.

The Yankee blockade about the Confederate ports had tightened, and
luxuries such as tea, coffee, silks, whalebone stays, colognes,
fashion magazines and books were scarce and dear.  Even the
cheapest cotton goods had skyrocketed in price and ladies were
regretfully making their old dresses do another season.  Looms
that had gathered dust for years had been brought down from
attics, and there were webs of homespun to be found in nearly
every parlor.  Everyone, soldiers, civilians, women, children and
negroes, began to wear homespun.  Gray, as the color of the
Confederate uniform, practically disappeared and homespun of a
butternut shade took its place.

Already the hospitals were worrying about the scarcity of quinine,
calomel, opium, chloroform and iodine.  Linen and cotton bandages
were too precious now to be thrown away when used, and every lady
who nursed at the hospitals brought home baskets of bloody strips
to be washed and ironed and returned for use on other sufferers.

But to Scarlett, newly emerged from the chrysalis of widowhood,
all the war meant was a time of gaiety and excitement.  Even the
small privations of clothing and food did not annoy her, so happy
was she to be in the world again.

When she thought of the dull times of the past year, with the days
going by one very much like another, life seemed to have quickened
to an incredible speed.  Every day dawned as an exciting
adventure, a day in which she would meet new men who would ask to
call on her, tell her how pretty she was, and how it was a
privilege to fight and, perhaps, to die for her.  She could and
did love Ashley with the last breath in her body, but that did not
prevent her from inveigling other men into asking to marry her.

The ever-present war in the background lent a pleasant informality
to social relations, an informality which older people viewed with
alarm.  Mothers found strange men calling on their daughters, men
who came without letters of introduction and whose antecedents
were unknown.  To their horror, mothers found their daughters
holding hands with these men.  Mrs. Merriwether, who had never
kissed her husband until after the wedding ceremony, could
scarcely believe her eyes when she caught Maybelle kissing the
little Zouave, Rene Picard, and her consternation was even greater
when Maybelle refused to be ashamed.  Even the fact that Rene
immediately asked for her hand did not improve matters.  Mrs.
Merriwether felt that the South was heading for a complete moral
collapse and frequently said so.  Other mothers concurred heartily
with her and blamed it on the war.

But men who expected to die within a week or a month could not
wait a year before they begged to call a girl by her first name,
with "Miss," of course, preceding it.  Nor would they go through
the formal and protracted courtships which good manners had
prescribed before the war.  They were likely to propose in three
or four months.  And girls who knew very well that a lady always
refused a gentleman the first three times he proposed rushed
headlong to accept the first time.

This informality made the war a lot of fun for Scarlett.  Except
for the messy business of nursing and the bore of bandage rolling,
she did not care if the war lasted forever.  In fact, she could
endure the hospital with equanimity now because it was a perfect
happy hunting ground.  The helpless wounded succumbed to her
charms without a struggle.  Renew their bandages, wash their
faces, pat up their pillows and fan them, and they fell in love.
Oh, it was Heaven after the last dreary year!

Scarlett was back again where she had been before she married
Charles and it was as if she had never married him, never felt the
shock of his death, never borne Wade.  War and marriage and
childbirth had passed over her without touching any deep chord
within her and she was unchanged.  She had a child but he was
cared for so well by the others in the red brick house she could
almost forget him.  In her mind and heart, she was Scarlett O'Hara
again, the belle of the County.  Her thoughts and activities were
the same as they had been in the old days, but the field of her
activities had widened immensely.  Careless of the disapproval of
Aunt Pitty's friends, she behaved as she had behaved before her
marriage, went to parties, danced, went riding with soldiers,
flirted, did everything she had done as a girl, except stop
wearing mourning.  This she knew would be a straw that would break
the backs of Pittypat and Melanie.  She was as charming a widow as
she had been a girl, pleasant when she had her own way, obliging
as long as it did not discommode her, vain of her looks and her
popularity.

She was happy now where a few weeks before she had been miserable,
happy with her beaux and their reassurances of her charm, as happy
as she could be with Ashley married to Melanie and in danger.  But
somehow it was easier to bear the thought of Ashley belonging to
some one else when he was far away.  With the hundreds of miles
stretching between Atlanta and Virginia, he sometimes seemed as
much hers as Melanie's.

So the autumn months of 1862 went swiftly by with nursing,
dancing, driving and bandage rolling taking up all the time she
did not spend on brief visits to Tara.  These visits were
disappointing, for she had little opportunity for the long quiet
talks with her mother to which she looked forward while in
Atlanta, no time to sit by Ellen while she sewed, smelling the
faint fragrance of lemon verbena sachet as her skirts rustled,
feeling her soft hands on her cheek in a gentle caress.

Ellen was thin and preoccupied now and on her feet from morning
until long after the plantation was asleep.  The demands of the
Confederate commissary were growing heavier by the month, and hers
was the task of making Tara produce.  Even Gerald was busy, for
the first time in many years, for he could get no overseer to take
Jonas Wilkerson's place and he was riding his own acres.  With
Ellen too busy for more than a goodnight kiss and Gerald in the
fields all day, Scarlett found Tara boring.  Even her sisters were
taken up with their own concerns.  Suellen had now come to an
"understanding" with Frank Kennedy and sang "When This Cruel War
Is Over" with an arch meaning Scarlett found well-nigh
unendurable, and Carreen was too wrapped up in dreams of Brent
Tarleton to be interesting company.

Though Scarlett always went home to Tara with a happy heart, she
was never sorry when the inevitable letters came from Pitty and
Melanie, begging her to return.  Ellen always sighed at these
times, saddened by the thought of her oldest daughter and her only
grandchild leaving her.

"But I mustn't be selfish and keep you here when you are needed to
nurse in Atlanta," she said.  "Only--only, my darling, it seems
that I never get the time to talk to you and to feel that you are
my own little girl again before you are gone from me."

"I'm always your little girl," Scarlett would say and bury her
head upon Ellen's breast, her guilt rising up to accuse her.  She
did not tell her mother that it was the dancing and the beaux
which drew her back to Atlanta and not the service of the
Confederacy.  There were many things she kept from her mother
these days.  But, most of all, she kept secret the fact that Rhett
Butler called frequently at Aunt Pittypat's house.



During the months that followed the bazaar, Rhett called whenever
he was in town, taking Scarlett riding in his carriage, escorting
her to danceables and bazaars and waiting outside the hospital to
drive her home.  She lost her fear of his betraying her secret,
but there always lurked in the back of her mind the disquieting
memory that he had seen her at her worst and knew the truth about
Ashley.  It was this knowledge that checked her tongue when he
annoyed her.  And he annoyed her frequently.

He was in his mid-thirties, older than any beau she had ever had,
and she was as helpless as a child to control and handle him as
she had handled beaux nearer her own age.  He always looked as if
nothing had ever surprised him and much had amused him and, when
he had gotten her into a speechless temper, she felt that she
amused him more than anything in the world.  Frequently she flared
into open wrath under his expert baiting, for she had Gerald's
Irish temper along with the deceptive sweetness of face she had
inherited from Ellen.  Heretofore she had never bothered to
control her temper except in Ellen's presence.  Now it was painful
to have to choke back words for fear of his amused grin.  If only
he would ever lose his temper too, then she would not feel at such
a disadvantage.

After tilts with him from which she seldom emerged the victor she
vowed he was impossible, ill-bred and no gentleman and she would
have nothing more to do with him.  But sooner or later, he
returned to Atlanta, called, presumably on Aunt Pitty, and
presented Scarlett, with overdone gallantry, a box of bonbons he
had brought her from Nassau.  Or preempted a seat by her at a
musicale or claimed her at a dance, and she was usually so amused
by his bland impudence that she laughed and overlooked his past
misdeeds until the next occurred.

For all his exasperating qualities, she grew to look forward to
his calls.  There was something exciting about him that she could
not analyze, something different from any man she had ever known.
There was something breathtaking in the grace of his big body
which made his very entrance into a room like an abrupt physical
impact, something in the impertinence and bland mockery of his
dark eyes that challenged her spirit to subdue him.

"It's almost like I was in love with him!" she thought,
bewildered.  "But I'm not and I just can't understand it."

But the exciting feeling persisted.  When he came to call, his
complete masculinity made Aunt Pitty's well-bred and ladylike
house seem small, pale and a trifle fusty.  Scarlett was not the
only member of the household who reacted strangely and unwillingly
to his presence, for he kept Aunt Pitty in a flutter and a
ferment.

While Pitty knew Ellen would disapprove of his calls on her
daughter, and knew also that the edict of Charleston banning him
from polite society was not one to be lightly disregarded, she
could no more resist his elaborate compliments and hand kissing
than a fly can resist a honey pot.  Moreover, he usually brought
her some little gift from Nassau which he assured her he had
purchased especially for her and blockaded in at risk of his life--
papers of pins and needles, buttons, spools of silk thread and
hairpins.  It was almost impossible to obtain these small luxuries
now--ladies were wearing hand-whittled wooden hairpins and
covering acorns with cloth for buttons--and Pitty lacked the moral
stamina to refuse them.  Besides, she had a childish love of
surprise packages and could not resist opening his gifts.  And,
having once opened them, she did not feel that she could refuse
them.  Then, having accepted his gifts, she could not summon
courage enough to tell him his reputation made it improper for him
to call on three lone women who had no male protector.  Aunt Pitty
always felt that she needed a male protector when Rhett Butler was
in the house.

"I don't know what it is about him," she would sigh helplessly.
"But--well, I think he'd be a nice, attractive man if I could just
feel that--well, that deep down in his heart he respected women."

Since the return of her wedding ring, Melanie had felt that Rhett
was a gentleman of rare refinement and delicacy and she was
shocked at this remark.  He was unfailingly courteous to her, but
she was a little timid with him, largely because she was shy with
any man she had not known from childhood.  Secretly she was very
sorry for him, a feeling which would have amused him had he been
aware of it.  She was certain that some romantic sorrow had
blighted his life and made him hard and bitter, and she felt that
what he needed was the love of a good woman.  In all her sheltered
life she had never seen evil and could scarcely credit its
existence, and when gossip whispered things about Rhett and the
girl in Charleston she was shocked and unbelieving.  And, instead
of turning her against him, it only made her more timidly gracious
toward him because of her indignation at what she fancied was a
gross injustice done him.

Scarlett silently agreed with Aunt Pitty.  She, too, felt that he
had no respect for any woman, unless perhaps for Melanie.  She
still felt unclothed every time his eyes ran up and down her
figure.  It was not that he ever said anything.  Then she could
have scorched him with hot words.  It was the bold way his eyes
looked out of his swarthy face with a displeasing air of
insolence, as if all women were his property to be enjoyed in his
own good time.  Only with Melanie was this look absent.  There was
never that cool look of appraisal, never mockery in his eyes, when
he looked at Melanie; and there was an especial note in his voice
when he spoke to her, courteous, respectful, anxious to be of
service.

"I don't see why you're so much nicer to her than to me," said
Scarlett petulantly, one afternoon when Melanie and Pitty had
retired to take their naps and she was alone with him.

For an hour she had watched Rhett hold the yarn Melanie was
winding for knitting, had noted the blank inscrutable expression
when Melanie talked at length and with pride of Ashley and his
promotion.  Scarlett knew Rhett had no exalted opinion of Ashley
and cared nothing at all about the fact that he had been made a
major.  Yet he made polite replies and murmured the correct things
about Ashley's gallantry.

And if I so much as mention Ashley's name, she had thought
irritably, he cocks his eyebrow up and smiles that nasty, knowing
smile!

"I'm much prettier than she is," she continued, "and I don't see
why you're nicer to her."

"Dare I hope that you are jealous?"

"Oh, don't presume!"

"Another hope crushed.  If I am 'nicer' to Mrs. Wilkes, it is
because she deserves it.  She is one of the very few kind, sincere
and unselfish persons I have ever known.  But perhaps you have
failed to note these qualities.  And moreover, for all her youth,
she is one of the few great ladies I have ever been privileged to
know."

"Do you mean to say you don't think I'm a great lady, too?"

"I think we agreed on the occasion of our first meeting that you
were no lady at all."

"Oh, if you are going to be hateful and rude enough to bring that
up again!  How can you hold that bit of childish temper against
me?  That was so long ago and I've grown up since then and I'd
forget all about it if you weren't always harping and hinting
about it."

"I don't think it was childish temper and I don't believe you've
changed.  You are just as capable now as then of throwing vases if
you don't get your own way.  But you usually get your way now.
And so there's no necessity for broken bric-a-brac."

"Oh, you are--I wish I was a man!  I'd call you out and--"

"And get killed for your pains.  I can drill a dime at fifty
yards.  Better stick to your own weapons--dimples, vases and the
like."

"You are just a rascal."

"Do you expect me to fly into a rage at that?  I am sorry to
disappoint you.  You can't make me mad by calling me names that are
true.  Certainly I'm a rascal, and why not?  It's a free country and
a man may be a rascal if he chooses.  It's only hypocrites like you,
my dear lady, just as black at heart but trying to hide it, who
become enraged when called by their right names."

She was helpless before his calm smile and his drawling remarks,
for she had never before met anyone who was so completely
impregnable. Her weapons of scorn, coldness and abuse blunted
in her hands, for nothing she could say would shame him.  It had
been her experience that the liar was the hottest to defend his
veracity, the coward his courage, the ill-bred his gentlemanliness,
and the cad his honor.  But not Rhett.  He admitted everything and
laughed and dared her to say more.

He came and went during these months, arriving unheralded and
leaving without saying good-by.  Scarlett never discovered just
what business brought him to Atlanta, for few other blockaders
found it necessary to come so far away from the coast.  They
landed their cargoes at Wilmington or Charleston, where they were
met by swarms of merchants and speculators from all over the South
who assembled to buy blockaded goods at auction.  It would have
pleased her to think that he made these trips to see her, but even
her abnormal vanity refused to believe this.  If he had ever once
made love to her, seemed jealous of the other men who crowded
about her, even tried to hold her hand or begged for a picture or
a handkerchief to cherish, she would have thought triumphantly he
had been caught by her charms.  But he remained annoyingly
unloverlike and, worst of all, seemed to see through all her
maneuverings to bring him to his knees.

Whenever he came to town, there was a feminine fluttering.  Not
only did the romantic aura of the dashing blockader hang about him
but there was also the titillating element of the wicked and the
forbidden.  He had such a bad reputation!  And every time the
matrons of Atlanta gathered together to gossip, his reputation
grew worse, which only made him all the more glamorous to the
young girls.  As most of them were quite innocent, they had heard
little more than that he was "quite loose with women"--and exactly
how a man went about the business of being "loose" they did not
know.  They also heard whispers that no girl was safe with him.
With such a reputation, it was strange that he had never so much
as kissed the hand of an unmarried girl since he first appeared in
Atlanta.  But that only served to make him more mysterious and
more exciting.

Outside of the army heroes, he was the most talked-about man in
Atlanta.  Everyone knew in detail how he had been expelled from
West Point for drunkenness and "something about women."  That
terrific scandal concerning the Charleston girl he had compromised
and the brother he had killed was public property.  Correspondence
with Charleston friends elicited the further information that his
father, a charming old gentleman with an iron will and a ramrod
for a backbone, had cast him out without a penny when he was
twenty and even stricken his name from the family Bible.  After
that he had wandered to California in the gold rush of 1849 and
thence to South America and Cuba, and the reports of his
activities in these parts were none too savory.  Scrapes about
women, several shootings, gun running to the revolutionists in
Central America and, worst of all, professional gambling were
included in his career, as Atlanta heard it.

There was hardly a family in Georgia who could not own to their
sorrow at least one male member or relative who gambled, losing
money, houses, land and slaves.  But that was different.  A man
could gamble himself to poverty and still be a gentleman, but a
professional gambler could never be anything but an outcast.

Had it not been for the upset conditions due to the war and his
own services to the Confederate government, Rhett Butler would
never have been received in Atlanta.  But now, even the most
strait laced felt that patriotism called upon them to be more
broad minded.  The more sentimental were inclined to view that the
black sheep of the Butler family had repented of his evil ways and
was making an attempt to atone for his sins.  So the ladies felt
in duty bound to stretch a point, especially in the case of so
intrepid a blockader.  Everyone knew now that the fate of the
Confederacy rested as much upon the skill of the blockade boats in
eluding the Yankee fleet as it did upon the soldiers at the front.

Rumor had it that Captain Butler was one of the best pilots in the
South and that he was reckless and utterly without nerves.  Reared
in Charleston, he knew every inlet, creek, shoal and rock of the
Carolina coast near that port, and he was equally at home in the
waters around Wilmington.  He had never lost a boat or even been
forced to dump a cargo.  At the onset of the war, he had emerged
from obscurity with enough money to buy a small swift boat and
now, when blockaded goods realized two thousand per cent on each
cargo, he owned four boats.  He had good pilots and paid them
well, and they slid out of Charleston and Wilmington on dark
nights, bearing cotton for Nassau, England and Canada.  The cotton
mills of England were standing idle and the workers were starving,
and any blockader who could outwit the Yankee fleet could command
his own price in Liverpool.  Rhett's boats were singularly lucky
both in taking out cotton for the Confederacy and bringing in the
war materials for which the South was desperate.  Yes, the ladies
felt they could forgive and forget a great many things for such a
brave man.

He was a dashing figure and one that people turned to look at.  He
spent money freely, rode a wild black stallion, and wore clothes
which were always the height of style and tailoring.  The latter
in itself was enough to attract attention to him, for the uniforms
of the soldiers were dingy and worn now and the civilians, even
when turned out in their best, showed skillful patching and
darning.  Scarlett thought she had never seen such elegant pants
as he wore, fawn colored, shepherd's plaid, and checked.  As for
his waistcoats, they were indescribably handsome, especially the
white watered-silk one with tiny pink rosebuds embroidered on it.
And he wore these garments with a still more elegant air as though
unaware of their glory.

There were few ladies who could resist his charms when he chose to
exert them, and finally even Mrs. Merriwether unbent and invited
him to Sunday dinner.

Maybelle Merriwether was to marry her little Zouave when he got
his next furlough, and she cried every time she thought of it, for
she had set her heart on marrying in a white satin dress and there
was no white satin in the Confederacy.  Nor could she borrow a
dress, for the satin wedding dresses of years past had all gone
into the making of battle flags.  Useless for the patriotic Mrs.
Merriwether to upbraid her daughter and point out that homespun
was the proper bridal attire for a Confederate bride.  Maybelle
wanted satin.  She was willing, even proud to go without hairpins
and buttons and nice shoes and candy and tea for the sake of the
Cause, but she wanted a satin wedding dress.

Rhett, hearing of this from Melanie, brought in from England yards
and yards of gleaming white satin and a lace veil and presented
them to her as a wedding gift.  He did it in such a way that it
was unthinkable to even mention paying him for them, and Maybelle
was so delighted she almost kissed him.  Mrs. Merriwether knew
that so expensive a gift--and a gift of clothing at that--was
highly improper, but she could think of no way of refusing when
Rhett told her in the most florid language that nothing was too
good to deck the bride of one of our brave heroes.  So Mrs.
Merriwether invited him to dinner, feeling that this concession
more than paid for the gift.

He not only brought Maybelle the satin but he was able to give
excellent hints on the making of the wedding dress.  Hoops in
Paris were wider this season and skirts were shorter.  They were
no longer ruffled but were gathered up in scalloped festoons,
showing braided petticoats beneath.  He said, too, that he had
seen no pantalets on the streets, so he imagined they were "out."
Afterwards, Mrs. Merriwether told Mrs. Elsing she feared that if
she had given him any encouragement at all, he would have told her
exactly what kind of drawers were being worn by Parisiennes.

Had he been less obviously masculine, his ability to recall
details of dresses, bonnets and coiffures would have been put down
as the rankest effeminacy.  The ladies always felt a little odd
when they besieged him with questions about styles, but they did
it nevertheless.  They were as isolated from the world of fashion
as shipwrecked mariners, for few books of fashion came through the
blockade.  For all they knew the ladies of France might be shaving
their heads and wearing coonskin caps, so Rhett's memory for
furbelows was an excellent substitute for Godey's Lady's Book.  He
could and did notice details so dear to feminine hearts, and after
each trip abroad he could be found in the center of a group of
ladies, telling that bonnets were smaller this year and perched
higher, covering most of the top of the head, that plumes and not
flowers were being used to trim them, that the Empress of France
had abandoned the chignon for evening wear and had her hair piled
almost on the top of her head, showing all of her ears, and that
evening frocks were shockingly low again.



For some months, he was the most popular and romantic figure the
town knew, despite his previous reputation, despite the faint
rumors that he was engaged not only in blockading but in
speculating on foodstuffs, too.  People who did not like him said
that after every trip he made to Atlanta, prices jumped five
dollars.  But even with this under-cover gossip seeping about, he
could have retained his popularity had he considered it worth
retaining.  Instead, it seemed as though, after trying the company
of the staid and patriotic citizens and winning their respect and
grudging liking, something perverse in him made him go out of his
way to affront them and show them that his conduct had been only a
masquerade and one which no longer amused him.

It was as though he bore an impersonal contempt for everyone and
everything in the South, the Confederacy in particular, and took
no pains to conceal it.  It was his remarks about the Confederacy
that made Atlanta look at him first in bewilderment, then coolly
and then with hot rage.  Even before 1862 passed into 1863, men
were bowing to him with studied frigidity and women beginning to
draw their daughters to their sides when he appeared at a
gathering.

He seemed to take pleasure not only in affronting the sincere and
red-hot loyalties of Atlanta but in presenting himself in the
worst possible light.  When well-meaning people complimented him
on his bravery in running the blockade, he blandly replied that he
was always frightened when in danger, as frightened as were the
brave boys at the front.  Everyone knew there had never been a
cowardly Confederate soldier and they found this statement
peculiarly irritating.  He always referred to the soldiers as "our
brave boys" and "our heroes in gray" and did it in such a way as
to convey the utmost in insult.  When daring young ladies, hoping
for a flirtation, thanked him for being one of the heroes who
fought for them, he bowed and declared that such was not the case,
for he would do the same thing for Yankee women if the same amount
of money were involved.

Since Scarlett's first meeting with him in Atlanta on the night of
the bazaar, he had talked with her in this manner, but now there
was a thinly veiled note of mockery in his conversations with
everyone.  When praised for his services to the Confederacy, he
unfailingly replied that blockading was a business with him.  If
he could make as much money out of government contracts, he would
say, picking out with his eyes those who had government contracts,
then he would certainly abandon the hazards of blockading and take
to selling shoddy cloth, sanded sugar, spoiled flour and rotten
leather to the Confederacy.

Most of his remarks were unanswerable, which made them all the
worse.  There had already been minor scandals about those holding
government contracts.  Letters from men at the front complained
constantly of shoes that wore out in a week, gunpowder that would
not ignite, harness that snapped at any strain, meat that was
rotten and flour that was full of weevils.  Atlanta people tried
to think that the men who sold such stuff to the government must
be contract holders from Alabama or Virginia or Tennessee, and not
Georgians.  For did not the Georgia contract holders include men
from the very best families?  Were they not the first to
contribute to the hospital funds and to the aid of soldiers'
orphans?  Were they not the first to cheer at "Dixie" and the most
rampant seekers, in oratory at least, for Yankee blood?  The full
tide of fury against those profiteering on government contracts
had not yet risen, and Rhett's words were taken merely as evidence
of his own bad breeding.

He not only affronted the town with insinuations of venality on
the part of men in high places and slurs on the courage of the men
in the field, but he took pleasure in tricking the dignified
citizenry into embarrassing situations.  He could no more resist
pricking the conceits, the hypocrisies and the flamboyant
patriotism of those about him than a small boy can resist putting
a pin into a balloon.  He neatly deflated the pompous and exposed
the ignorant and the bigoted, and he did it in such subtle ways,
drawing his victims out by his seemingly courteous interest, that
they never were quite certain what had happened until they stood
exposed as windy, high flown and slightly ridiculous.

During the months when the town accepted him, Scarlett had been
under no illusions about him.  She knew that his elaborate
gallantries and his florid speeches were all done with his tongue
in his cheek.  She knew that he was acting the part of the dashing
and patriotic blockade runner simply because it amused him.
Sometimes he seemed to her like the County boys with whom she had
grown up, the wild Tarleton twins with their obsession for practical
jokes; the devil-inspired Fontaines, teasing, mischievous; the
Calverts who would sit up all night planning hoaxes.  But there was
a difference, for beneath Rhett's seeming lightness there was
something malicious, almost sinister in its suave brutality.

Though she was thoroughly aware of his insincerity, she much
preferred him in the role of the romantic blockader.  For one
thing, it made her own situation in associating with him so much
easier than it had been at first.  So, she was intensely annoyed
when he dropped his masquerade and set out apparently upon a
deliberate campaign to alienate Atlanta's good will.  It annoyed
her because it seemed foolish and also because some of the harsh
criticism directed at him fell on her.

It was at Mrs. Elsing's silver musicale for the benefit of the
convalescents that Rhett signed his final warrant of ostracism.
That afternoon the Elsing home was crowded with soldiers on leave
and men from the hospitals, members of the Home Guard and the
militia unit, and matrons, widows and young girls.  Every chair in
the house was occupied, and even the long winding stair was packed
with guests.  The large cut-glass bowl held at the door by the
Elsings' butler had been emptied twice of its burden of silver
coins.  That in itself was enough to make the affair a success,
for now a dollar in silver was worth sixty dollars in Confederate
paper money.

Every girl with any pretense to accomplishments had sung or played
the piano, and the tableaux vivants had been greeted with
flattering applause.  Scarlett was much pleased with herself, for
not only had she and Melanie rendered a touching duet, "When the
Dew Is on the Blossom," followed as an encore by the more
sprightly "Oh, Lawd, Ladies, Don't Mind Stephen!" but she had also
been chosen to represent the Spirit of the Confederacy in the last
tableau.

She had looked most fetching, wearing a modestly draped Greek robe
of white cheesecloth girdled with red and blue and holding the
Stars and Bars in one hand, while with the other she stretched out
to the kneeling Captain Carey Ashburn, of Alabama, the gold-hilted
saber which had belonged to Charles and his father.

When her tableau was over, she could not help seeking Rhett's eyes
to see if he had appreciated the pretty picture she made.  With a
feeling of exasperation she saw that he was in an argument and
probably had not even noticed her.  Scarlett could see by the
faces of the group surrounding him that they were infuriated by
what he was saying.

She made her way toward them and, in one of those odd silences
which sometimes fall on a gathering, she heard Willie Guinan, of
the militia outfit, say plainly:  "Do I understand, sir, that you
mean the Cause for which our heroes have died is not sacred?"

"If you were run over by a railroad train your death wouldn't
sanctify the railroad company, would it?" asked Rhett and his
voice sounded as if he were humbly seeking information.

"Sir," said Willie, his voice shaking, "if we were not under this
roof--"

"I tremble to think what would happen," said Rhett.  "For, of
course, your bravery is too well known."

Willie went scarlet and all conversation ceased.  Everyone was
embarrassed.  Willie was strong and healthy and of military age
and yet he wasn't at the front.  Of course, he was the only boy
his mother had and, after all, somebody had to be in the militia
to protect the state.  But there were a few irreverent snickers
from convalescent officers when Rhett spoke of bravery.

"Oh, why doesn't he keep his mouth shut!" thought Scarlett
indignantly.  "He's simply spoiling the whole party!"

Dr. Meade's brows were thunderous.

"Nothing may be sacred to you, young man," he said, in the voice
he always used when making speeches.  "But there are many things
sacred to the patriotic men and ladies of the South.  And the
freedom of our land from the usurper is one and States' Rights is
another and--"

Rhett looked lazy and his voice had a silky, almost bored, note.

"All wars are sacred," he said.  "To those who have to fight them.
If the people who started wars didn't make them sacred, who would
be foolish enough to fight?  But, no matter what rallying cries
the orators give to the idiots who fight, no matter what noble
purposes they assign to wars, there is never but one reason for a
war.  And that is money.  All wars are in reality money squabbles.
But so few people ever realize it.  Their ears are too full of
bugles and drums and the fine words from stay-at-home orators.
Sometimes the rallying cry is 'Save the Tomb of Christ from the
Heathen!'  Sometimes it's 'Down with Popery!' and sometimes
'Liberty!' and sometimes 'Cotton, Slavery and States' Rights!'"

"What on earth has the Pope to do with it?" thought Scarlett.  "Or
Christ's tomb, either?"

But as she hurried toward the incensed group, she saw Rhett bow
jauntily and start toward the doorway through the crowd.  She
started after him but Mrs. Elsing caught her skirt and held her.

"Let him go," she said in a clear voice that carried throughout
the tensely quiet room.  "Let him go.  He is a traitor, a
speculator!  He is a viper that we have nursed to our bosoms!"

Rhett, standing in the hall, his hat in his hand, heard as he was
intended to hear and, turning, surveyed the room for a moment.  He
looked pointedly at Mrs. Elsing's flat bosom, grinned suddenly
and, bowing, made his exit.



Mrs. Merriwether rode home in Aunt Pitty's carriage, and scarcely
had the four ladies seated themselves when she exploded.

"There now, Pittypat Hamilton!  I hope you are satisfied!"

"With what?" cried Pitty, apprehensively.

"With the conduct of that wretched Butler man you've been
harboring."

Pittypat fluttered, too upset by the accusation to recall that
Mrs. Merriwether had also been Rhett Butler's hostess on several
occasions.  Scarlett and Melanie thought of this, but bred to
politeness to their elders, refrained from remarking on the
matter.  Instead they studiously looked down at their mittened
hands.

"He insulted us all and the Confederacy too," said Mrs. Merriwether,
and her stout bust heaved violently beneath its glittering
passementerie trimmings.  "Saying that we were fighting for money!
Saying that our leaders had lied to us!  He should be put in jail.
Yes, he should.  I shall speak to Dr. Meade about it.  If Mr.
Merriwether were only alive, he'd tend to him!  Now, Pitty Hamilton,
you listen to me.  You mustn't ever let that scamp come into your
house again!"

"Oh," mumbled Pitty, helplessly, looking as if she wished she were
dead.  She looked appealingly at the two girls who kept their eyes
cast down and then hopefully toward Uncle Peter's erect back.  She
knew he was listening attentively to every word and she hoped he
would turn and take a hand in the conversation, as he frequently
did.  She hoped he would say:  "Now, Miss Dolly, you let Miss
Pitty be," but Peter made no move.  He disapproved heartily of
Rhett Butler and poor Pitty knew it.  She sighed and said:  "Well,
Dolly, if you think--"

"I do think," returned Mrs. Merriwether firmly.  "I can't imagine
what possessed you to receive him in the first place.  After this
afternoon, there won't be a decent home in town that he'll be
welcome in.  Do get up some gumption and forbid him your house."

She turned a sharp eye on the girls.  "I hope you two are marking
my words," she continued, "for it's partly your fault, being so
pleasant to him.  Just tell him politely but firmly that his
presence and his disloyal talk are distinctly unwelcome at your
house."

By this time Scarlett was boiling, ready to rear like a horse at
the touch of a strange rough hand on its bridle.  But she was
afraid to speak.  She could not risk Mrs. Merriwether writing
another letter to her mother.

"You old buffalo!" she thought, her face crimson with suppressed
fury.  "How heavenly it would be to tell you just what I think of
you and your bossy ways!"

"I never thought to live long enough to hear such disloyal words
spoken of our Cause," went on Mrs. Merriwether, by this time in a
ferment of righteous anger.  "Any man who does not think our Cause
is just and holy should be hanged!  I don't want to hear of you
two girls ever even speaking to him again--  For Heaven's sake,
Melly, what ails you?"

Melanie was white and her eyes were enormous.

"I will speak to him again," she said in a low voice.  "I will not
be rude to him.  I will not forbid him the house."

Mrs. Merriwether's breath went out of her lungs as explosively as
though she had been punched.  Aunt Pitty's fat mouth popped open
and Uncle Peter turned to stare.

"Now, why didn't I have the gumption to say that?" thought
Scarlett, jealousy mixing with admiration.  "How did that little
rabbit ever get up spunk enough to stand up to old lady
Merriwether?"

Melanie's hands were shaking but she went on hurriedly, as though
fearing her courage would fail her if she delayed.

"I won't be rude to him because of what he said, because--  It was
rude of him to say it out loud--most ill advised--but it's--it's
what Ashley thinks.  And I can't forbid the house to a man who
thinks what my husband thinks.  It would be unjust."

Mrs. Merriwether's breath had come back and she charged.

"Melly Hamilton, I never heard such a lie in all my life!  There
was never a Wilkes who was a coward--"

"I never said Ashley was a coward," said Melanie, her eyes
beginning to flash.  "I said he thinks what Captain Butler thinks,
only he expresses it in different words.  And he doesn't go around
saying it at musicales, I hope.  But he has written it to me."

Scarlett's guilty conscience stirred as she tried to recall what
Ashley might have written that would lead Melanie to make such a
statement, but most of the letters she had read had gone out of
her head as soon as she finished reading them.  She believed
Melanie had simply taken leave of her senses.

"Ashley wrote me that we should not be fighting the Yankees.  And
that we have been betrayed into it by statesmen and orators
mouthing catchwords and prejudices," said Melly rapidly.  "He said
nothing in the world was worth what this war was going to do to
us.  He said here wasn't anything at all to glory--it was just
misery and dirt."

"Oh!  That letter," thought Scarlett.  "Was that what he meant?"

"I don't believe it," said Mrs. Merriwether firmly.  "You
misunderstood his meaning."

"I never misunderstand Ashley," Melanie replied quietly, though
her lips were trembling.  "I understand him perfectly.  He meant
exactly what Captain Butler meant, only he didn't say it in a rude
way."

"You should be ashamed of yourself, comparing a fine man like
Ashley Wilkes to a scoundrel like Captain Butler!  I suppose you,
too, think the Cause is nothing!"

"I--I don't know what I think," Melanie began uncertainly, her
fire deserting her and panic at her outspokenness taking hold of
her.  "I--I'd die for the Cause, like Ashley would.  But--I mean--
I mean, I'll let the men folks do the thinking, because they are
so much smarter."

"I never heard the like," snorted Mrs. Merriwether.  "Stop, Uncle
Peter, you're driving past my house!"

Uncle Peter, preoccupied with the conversation behind him, had
driven past the Merriwether carriage block and he backed up the
horse.  Mrs. Merriwether alighted, her bonnet ribbons shaking like
sails in a storm.

"You'll be sorry," she said.

Uncle Peter whipped up the horse.

"You young misses ought ter tek shame, gittin' Miss Pitty in a
state," he scolded.

"I'm not in a state," replied Pitty, surprisingly, for less strain
than this had frequently brought on fainting fits.  "Melly, honey,
I knew you were doing it just to take up for me and, really, I was
glad to see somebody take Dolly down a peg.  She's so bossy.  How
did you have the courage?  But do you think you should have said
that about Ashley?"

"But it's true," answered Melanie and she began to cry softly.
"And I'm not ashamed that he thinks that way.  He thinks the war
is all wrong but he's willing to fight and die anyway, and that
takes lots more courage than fighting for something you think is
right."

"Lawd, Miss Melly, doan cry hyah on Peachtree Street," groaned
Uncle Peter, hastening his horse's pace.  "Folks'll talk sumpin'
scan'lous.  Wait till us gits home."

Scarlett said nothing.  She did not even squeeze the hand that
Melanie had inserted into her palm for comfort.  She had read
Ashley's letters for only one purpose--to assure herself that he
still loved her.  Now Melanie had given a new meaning to passages
in the letters which Scarlett's eyes had barely seen.  It shocked
her to realize that anyone as absolutely perfect as Ashley could
have any thought in common with such a reprobate as Rhett Butler.
She thought:  "They both see the truth of this war, but Ashley is
willing to die about it and Rhett isn't.  I think that shows
Rhett's good sense."  She paused a moment, horror struck that she
could have such a thought about Ashley.  "They both see the same
unpleasant truth, but Rhett likes to look it in the face and
enrage people by talking about it--and Ashley can hardly bear to
face it."

It was very bewildering.



CHAPTER XIII


Under Mrs. Merriwether's goading, Dr. Meade took action, in the
form of a letter to the newspaper wherein he did not mention Rhett
by name, though his meaning was obvious.  The editor, sensing the
social drama of the letter, put it on the second page of the
paper, in itself a startling innovation, as the first two pages of
the paper were always devoted to advertisements of slaves, mules,
plows, coffins, houses for sale or rent, cures for private
diseases, abortifacients and restoratives for lost manhood.

The doctor's letter was the first of a chorus of indignation that
was beginning to be heard all over the South against speculators,
profiteers and holders of government contracts.  Conditions in
Wilmington, the chief blockade port, now that Charleston's port
was practically sealed by the Yankee gunboats, had reached the
proportions of an open scandal.  Speculators swarmed Wilmington
and, having the ready cash, bought up boatloads of goods and held
them for a rise in prices.  The rise always came, for with the
increasing scarcity of necessities, prices leaped higher by the
month.  The civilian population had either to do without or buy at
the speculators' prices, and the poor and those in moderate
circumstances were suffering increasing hardships.  With the rise
in prices, Confederate money sank, and with its rapid fall there
rose a wild passion for luxuries.  Blockaders were commissioned to
bring in necessities but now it was the higher-priced luxuries
that filled their boats to the exclusion of the things the
Confederacy vitally needed.  People frenziedly bought these
luxuries with the money they had today, fearing that tomorrow's
prices would be higher and the money worthless.

To make matters worse, there was only one railroad line from
Wilmington to Richmond and, while thousands of barrels of flour
and boxes of bacon spoiled and rotted in wayside stations for want
of transportation, speculators with wines, taffetas and coffee to
sell seemed always able to get their goods to Richmond two days
after they were landed at Wilmington.

The rumor which had been creeping about underground was now being
openly discussed, that Rhett Butler not only ran his own four
boats and sold the cargoes at unheard-of prices but bought up the
cargoes of other boats and held them for rises in prices.  It was
said that he was at the head of a combine worth more than a
million dollars, with Wilmington as its headquarters for the
purpose of buying blockade goods on the docks.  They had dozens of
warehouses in that city and in Richmond, so the story ran, and the
warehouses were crammed with food and clothing that were being
held for higher prices.  Already soldiers and civilians alike were
feeling the pinch, and the muttering against him and his fellow
speculators was bitter.

"There are many brave and patriotic men in the blockade arm of the
Confederacy's naval service," ran the last of the doctor's letter,
"unselfish men who are risking their lives and all their wealth
that the Confederacy may survive.  They are enshrined in the
hearts of all loyal Southerners, and no one begrudges them the
scant monetary returns they make for their risks.  They are
unselfish gentlemen, and we honor them.  Of these men, I do not
speak.

"But there are other scoundrels who masquerade under the cloak of
the blockader for their own selfish gains, and I call down the
just wrath and vengeance of an embattled people, fighting in the
justest of Causes, on these human vultures who bring in satins and
laces when our men are dying for want of quinine, who load their
boats with tea and wines when our heroes are writhing for lack of
morphia.  I execrate these vampires who are sucking the lifeblood
of the men who follow Robert Lee--these men who are making the
very name of blockader a stench in the nostrils of all patriotic
men.  How can we endure these scavengers in our midst with their
varnished boots when our boys are tramping barefoot into battle?
How can we tolerate them with their champagnes and their pates of
Strasbourg when our soldiers are shivering about their camp fires
and gnawing moldy bacon?  I call upon every loyal Confederate to
cast them out."

Atlanta read, knew the oracle had spoken, and, as loyal
Confederates, they hastened to cast Rhett out.

Of all the homes which had received him in the fall of 1862, Miss
Pittypat's was almost the only one into which he could enter in
1863.  And, except for Melanie, he probably would not have been
received there.  Aunt Pitty was in a state whenever he was in
town.  She knew very well what her friends were saying when she
permitted him to call but she still lacked the courage to tell him
he was unwelcome.  Each time he arrived in Atlanta, she set her
fat mouth and told the girls that she would meet him at the door
and forbid him to enter.  And each time he came, a little package
in his hand and a compliment for her charm and beauty on his lips,
she wilted.

"I just don't know what to do," she would moan.  "He just looks at
me and I--I'm scared to death of what he would do if I told him.
He's got such a bad reputation.  Do you suppose he would strike
me--or--or--  Oh, dear, if Charlie were only alive!  Scarlett, YOU
must tell him not to call again--tell him in a nice way.  Oh, me!
I do believe you encourage him, and the whole town is talking and,
if your mother ever finds out, what will she say to me?  Melly,
you must not be so nice to him.  Be cool and distant and he will
understand.  Oh, Melly, do you think I'd better write Henry a note
and ask him to speak to Captain Butler?"

"No, I don't," said Melanie.  "And I won't be rude to him, either.
I think people are acting like chickens with their heads off about
Captain Butler.  I'm sure he can't be all the bad things Dr. Meade
and Mrs. Merriwether say he is.  He wouldn't hold food from
starving people.  Why, he even gave me a hundred dollars for the
orphans.  I'm sure he's just as loyal and patriotic as any of us
and he's just too proud to defend himself.  You know how obstinate
men are when they get their backs up."

Aunt Pitty knew nothing about men, either with their backs up or
otherwise, and she could only wave her fat little hands
helplessly.  As for Scarlett, she had long ago become resigned to
Melanie's habit of seeing good in everyone.  Melanie was a fool,
but there was nothing anybody could do about it.

Scarlett knew that Rhett was not being patriotic and, though she
would have died rather than confess it, she did not care.  The
little presents he brought her from Nassau, little oddments that a
lady could accept with propriety, were what mattered most to her.
With prices as high as they were, where on earth could she get
needles and bonbons and hairpins, if she forbade the house to him?
No, it was easier to shift the responsibility to Aunt Pitty, who
after all was the head of the house, the chaperon and the arbiter
of morals.  Scarlett knew the town gossiped about Rhett's calls,
and about her too; but she also knew that in the eyes of Atlanta
Melanie Wilkes could do no wrong, and if Melanie defended Rhett
his calls were still tinged with respectability.

However, life would be pleasanter if Rhett would recant his
heresies.  She wouldn't have to suffer the embarrassment of seeing
him cut openly when she walked down Peachtree Street with him.

"Even if you think such things, why do you say them?" she scolded.
"If you'd just think what you please but keep your mouth shut,
everything would be so much nicer."

"That's your system, isn't it, my green-eyed hypocrite?  Scarlett,
Scarlett!  I hoped for more courageous conduct from you.  I
thought the Irish said what they thought and the Divvil take the
hindermost.  Tell me truthfully, don't you sometimes almost burst
from keeping your mouth shut?"

"Well--yes," Scarlett confessed reluctantly.  "I do get awfully
bored when they talk about the Cause, morning, noon and night.
But goodness, Rhett Butler, if I admitted it nobody would speak to
me and none of the boys would dance with me!"

"Ah, yes, and one must be danced with, at all costs.  Well, I
admire your self-control but I do not find myself equal to it.
Nor can I masquerade in a cloak of romance and patriotism, no
matter how convenient it might be.  There are enough stupid
patriots who are risking every cent they have in the blockade and
who are going to come out of this war paupers.  They don't need me
among their number, either to brighten the record of patriotism or
to increase the roll of paupers.  Let them have the haloes.  They
deserve them--for once I am being sincere--and, besides, haloes
will be about all they will have in a year or so."

"I think you are very nasty to even hint such things when you know
very well that England and France are coming in on our side in no
time and--"

"Why, Scarlett!  You must have been reading a newspaper!  I'm
surprised at you.  Don't do it again.  It addles women's brains.
For your information, I was in England, not a month ago, and I'll
tell you this.  England will never help the Confederacy.  England
never bets on the underdog.  That's why she's England.  Besides,
the fat Dutch woman who is sitting on the throne is a God-fearing
soul and she doesn't approve of slavery.  Let the English mill
workers starve because they can't get our cotton but never, never
strike a blow for slavery.  And as for France, that weak imitation
of Napoleon is far too busy establishing the French in Mexico to
be bothered with us.  In fact he welcomes this war, because it
keeps us too busy to run his troops out of Mexico. . . .  No,
Scarlett, the idea of assistance from abroad is just a newspaper
invention to keep up the morale of the South.  The Confederacy is
doomed.  It's living on its hump now, like the camel, and even the
largest of humps aren't inexhaustible.  I give myself about six
months more of blockading and then I'm through.  After that, it
will be too risky.  And I'll sell my boats to some foolish
Englishman who thinks he can slip them through.  But one way or
the other, it's not bothering me.  I've made money enough, and
it's in English banks and in gold.  None of this worthless paper
for me."

As always when he spoke, he sounded so plausible.  Other people
might call his utterances treachery but, to Scarlett, they always
rang with common sense and truth.  And she knew that this was
utterly wrong, knew she should be shocked and infuriated.
Actually she was neither, but she could pretend to be.  It made
her feel more respectable and ladylike.

"I think what Dr. Meade wrote about was right, Captain Butler.
The only way to redeem yourself is to enlist after you sell your
boats.  You're a West Pointer and--"

"You talk like a Baptist preacher making a recruiting speech.
Suppose I don't want to redeem myself?  Why should I fight to
uphold the system that cast me out?  I shall take pleasure in
seeing it smashed."

"I never heard of any system," she said crossly.

"No?  And yet you are a part of it, like I was, and I'll wager you
don't like it any more than I did.  Well, why am I the black sheep
of the Butler family?  For this reason and no other--I didn't
conform to Charleston and I couldn't.  And Charleston is the
South, only intensified.  I wonder if you realize yet what a bore
it is?  So many things that one must do because they've always
been done.  So many things, quite harmless, that one must not do
for the same reason.  So many things that annoyed me by their
senselessness.  Not marrying the young lady, of whom you have
probably heard, was merely the last straw.  Why should I marry a
boring fool, simply because an accident prevented me from getting
her home before dark?  And why permit her wild-eyed brother to
shoot and kill me, when I could shoot straighter?  If I had been a
gentleman, of course, I would have let him kill me and that would
have wiped the blot from the Butler escutcheon.  But--I like to
live.  And so I've lived and I've had a good time. . . .  When I
think of my brother, living among the sacred cows of Charleston,
and most reverent toward them, and remember his stodgy wife and
his Saint Cecilia Balls and his everlasting rice fields--then I
know the compensation for breaking with the system.  Scarlett, our
Southern way of living is as antiquated as the feudal system of
the Middle Ages.  The wonder is that it's lasted as long as it
has.  It had to go and it's going now.  And yet you expect me to
listen to orators like Dr. Meade who tell me our Cause is just and
holy?  And get so excited by the roll of drums that I'll grab a
musket and rush off to Virginia to shed my blood for Marse Robert?
What kind of a fool do you think I am?  Kissing the rod that
chastised me is not in my line.  The South and I are even now.
The South threw me out to starve once.  I haven't starved, and I
am making enough money out of the South's death throes to
compensate me for my lost birthright."

"I think you are vile and mercenary," said Scarlett, but her
remark was automatic.  Most of what he was saying went over her
head, as did any conversation that was not personal.  But part of
it made sense.  There were such a lot of foolish things about life
among nice people.  Having to pretend that her heart was in the
grave when it wasn't.  And how shocked everybody had been when she
danced at the bazaar.  And the infuriating way people lifted their
eyebrows every time she did or said anything the least bit
different from what every other young woman did and said.  But
still, she was jarred at hearing him attack the very traditions
that irked her most.  She had lived too long among people who
dissembled politely not to feel disturbed at hearing her own
thoughts put into words.

"Mercenary?  No, I'm only farsighted.  Though perhaps that is
merely a synonym for mercenary.  At least, people who were not as
farsighted as I will call it that.  Any loyal Confederate who had
a thousand dollars in cash in 1861 could have done what I did, but
how few were mercenary enough to take advantage of their
opportunities!  As for instance, right after Fort Sumter fell and
before the blockade was established, I bought up several thousand
bales of cotton at dirt-cheap prices and ran them to England.
They are still there in warehouses in Liverpool.  I've never sold
them.  I'm holding them until the English mills have to have
cotton and will give me any price I ask.  I wouldn't be surprised
if I got a dollar a pound."

"You'll get a dollar a pound when elephants roost in trees!"

"I'll believe I'll get it.  Cotton is at seventy-two cents a pound
already.  I'm going to be a rich man when this war is over,
Scarlett, because I was farsighted--pardon me, mercenary.  I told
you once before that there were two times for making big money,
one in the upbuilding of a country and the other in its
destruction.  Slow money on the upbuilding, fast money in the
crack-up.  Remember my words.  Perhaps they may be of use to you
some day."

"I do appreciate good advice so much," said Scarlett, with all the
sarcasm she could muster.  "But I don't need your advice.  Do you
think Pa is a pauper?  He's got all the money I'll ever need and
then I have Charles' property besides."

"I imagine the French aristocrats thought practically the same
thing until the very moment when they climbed into the tumbrils."



Frequently Rhett pointed out to Scarlett the inconsistency of her
wearing black mourning clothes when she was participating in all
social activities.  He liked bright colors and Scarlett's funeral
dresses and the crepe veil that hung from her bonnet to her heels
both amused him and offended him.  But she clung to her dull black
dresses and her veil, knowing that if she changed them for colors
without waiting several more years, the town would buzz even more
than it was already buzzing.  And besides, how would she ever
explain to her mother?

Rhett said frankly that the crepe veil made her look like a crow
and the black dresses added ten years to her age.  This ungallant
statement sent her flying to the mirror to see if she really did
look twenty-eight instead of eighteen.

"I should think you'd have more pride than to try to look like
Mrs. Merriwether," he taunted.  "And better taste than to wear
that veil to advertise a grief I'm sure you never felt.  I'll lay
a wager with you.  I'll have that bonnet and veil off your head
and a Paris creation on it within two months."

"Indeed, no, and don't let's discuss it any further," said
Scarlett, annoyed by his reference to Charles.  Rhett, who was
preparing to leave for Wilmington for another trip abroad,
departed with a grin on his face.

One bright summer morning some weeks later, he reappeared with a
brightly trimmed hatbox in his hand and, after finding that
Scarlett was alone in the house, he opened it.  Wrapped in layers
of tissue was a bonnet, a creation that made her cry:  "Oh, the
darling thing!" as she reached for it.  Starved for the sight,
much less the touch, of new clothes, it seemed the loveliest
bonnet she had ever seen.  It was of dark-green taffeta, lined
with water silk of a pale-jade color.  The ribbons that tied under
the chin were as wide as her hand and they, too, were pale green.
And, curled about the brim of this confection was the perkiest of
green ostrich plumes.

"Put it on," said Rhett, smiling.

She flew across the room to the mirror and plopped it on her head,
pushing back her hair to show her earrings and tying the ribbon
under her chin.

"How do I look?" she cried, pirouetting for his benefit and
tossing her head so that the plume danced.  But she knew she
looked pretty even before she saw confirmation in his eyes.  She
looked attractively saucy and the green of the lining made her
eyes dark emerald and sparkling.

"Oh, Rhett, whose bonnet is it?  I'll buy it.  I'll give you every
cent I've got for it."

"It's your bonnet," he said.  "Who else could wear that shade of
green?  Don't you think I carried the color of your eyes well in
my mind?"

"Did you really have it trimmed just for me?"

"Yes, and there's 'Rue de la Paix' on the box, if that means
anything to you."

It meant nothing to her, smiling at her reflection in the mirror.
Just at this moment, nothing mattered to her except that she
looked utterly charming in the first pretty hat she had put on her
head in two years.  What she couldn't do with this hat!  And then
her smile faded.

"Don't you like it?"

"Oh, it's a dream but--  Oh, I do hate to have to cover this
lovely green with crepe and dye the feather black."

He was beside her quickly and his deft fingers untied the wide bow
under her chin.  In a moment the hat was back in its box.

"What are you doing?  You said it was mine."

"But not to change to a mourning bonnet.  I shall find some other
charming lady with green eyes who appreciates my taste."

"Oh, you shan't!  I'll die if I don't have it!  Oh, please, Rhett,
don't be mean!  Let me have it."

"And turn it into a fright like your other hats?  No."

She clutched at the box.  That sweet thing that made her look so
young and enchanting to be given to some other girl?  Oh, never!
For a moment she thought of the horror of Pitty and Melanie.  She
thought of Ellen and what she would say, and she shivered.  But
vanity was stronger.

"I won't change it.  I promise.  Now, do let me have it."

He gave her the box with a slightly sardonic smile and watched her
while she put it on again and preened herself.

"How much is it?" she asked suddenly, her face falling.  "I have
only fifty dollars but next month--"

"It would cost about two thousand dollars, Confederate money," he
said with a grin at her woebegone expression.

"Oh, dear--  Well, suppose I give you the fifty now and then when
I get--"

"I don't want any money for it," he said.  "It's a gift."

Scarlett's mouth dropped open.  The line was so closely, so
carefully drawn where gifts from men were concerned.

"Candy and flowers, dear," Ellen had said time and again, "and
perhaps a book of poetry or an album or a small bottle of Florida
water are the only things a lady may accept from a gentleman.
Never, never any expensive gift, even from your fiance.  And never
any gift of jewelry or wearing apparel, not even gloves or
handkerchiefs.  Should you accept such gifts, men would know you
were no lady and would try to take liberties."

"Oh, dear," thought Scarlett, looking first at herself in the
mirror and then at Rhett's unreadable face.  "I simply can't tell
him I won't accept it.  It's too darling.  I'd--I'd almost rather
he took a liberty, if it was a very small one."  Then she was
horrified at herself for having such a thought and she turned
pink.

"I'll--I'll give you the fifty dollars--"

"If you do I will throw it in the gutter.  Or, better still buy
masses for your soul.  I'm sure your soul could do with a few
masses."

She laughed unwillingly, and the laughing reflection under the
green brim decided her instantly.

"Whatever are you trying to do to me?"

"I'm tempting you with fine gifts until your girlish ideals are
quite worn away and you are at my mercy," he said.  "'Accept only
candy and flowers from gentlemen, dearie,'" he mimicked, and she
burst into a giggle.

"You are a clever, black-hearted wretch, Rhett Butler, and you
know very well this bonnet's too pretty to be refused."

His eyes mocked her, even while they complimented her beauty.

"Of course, you can tell Miss Pitty that you gave me a sample of
taffeta and green silk and drew a picture of the bonnet and I
extorted fifty dollars from you for it."

"No.  I shall say one hundred dollars and she'll tell everybody in
town and everybody will be green with envy and talk about my
extravagance.  But Rhett, you mustn't bring me anything else so
expensive.  It's awfully kind of you, but I really couldn't accept
anything else."

"Indeed?  Well, I shall bring you presents so long as it pleases
me and so long as I see things that will enhance your charms.  I
shall bring you dark-green watered silk for a frock to match the
bonnet.  And I warn you that I am not kind.  I am tempting you
with bonnets and bangles and leading you into a pit.  Always
remember I never do anything without reason and I never give
anything without expecting something in return.  I always get
paid."

His black eyes sought her face and traveled to her lips.

Scarlett cast down her eyes, excitement filling her.  Now, he was
going to try to take liberties, just as Ellen predicted.  He was
going to kiss her, or try to kiss her, and she couldn't quite make
up her flurried mind which it should be.  If she refused, he might
jerk the bonnet right off her head and give it to some other girl.
On the other hand, if she permitted one chaste peck, he might
bring her other lovely presents in the hope of getting another
kiss.  Men set such a store by kisses, though Heaven alone knew
why.  And lots of times, after one kiss they fell completely in
love with a girl and made most entertaining spectacles of
themselves, provided the girl was clever and withheld her kisses
after the first one.  It would be exciting to have Rhett Butler in
love with her and admitting it and begging for a kiss or a smile.
Yes, she would let him kiss her.

But he made no move to kiss her.  She gave him a sidelong glance
from under her lashes and murmured encouragingly.

"So you always get paid, do you?  And what do you expect to get
from me?"

"That remains to be seen."

"Well, if you think I'll marry you to pay for the bonnet, I
won't," she said daringly and gave her head a saucy flirt that set
the plume to bobbing.

His white teeth gleamed under his little mustache.

"Madam, you flatter yourself, I do not want to marry you or anyone
else.  I am not a marrying man."

"Indeed!" she cried, taken aback and now determined that he should
take some liberty.  "I don't even intend to kiss you, either."

"Then why is your mouth all pursed up in that ridiculous way?"

"Oh!" she cried as she caught a glimpse of herself and saw that
her red lips were indeed in the proper pose for a kiss.  "Oh!" she
cried again, losing her temper and stamping her foot.  "You are
the horridest man I have ever seen and I don't care if I never lay
eyes on you again!"

"If you really felt that way, you'd stamp on the bonnet.  My, what
a passion you are in and it's quite becoming, as you probably
know.  Come, Scarlett, stamp on the bonnet to show me what you
think of me and my presents."

"Don't you dare touch this bonnet," she said, clutching it by the
bow and retreating.  He came after her, laughing softly and took
her hands in his.

"Oh, Scarlett, you are so young you wring my heart," he said.
"And I shall kiss you, as you seem to expect it," and leaning down
carelessly, his mustache just grazed her cheek.  "Now, do you feel
that you must slap me to preserve the proprieties?"

Her lips mutinous, she looked up into his eyes and saw so much
amusement in their dark depths that she burst into laughter.  What
a tease he was and how exasperating!  If he didn't want to marry
her and didn't even want to kiss her, what did he want?  If he
wasn't in love with her, why did he call so often and bring her
presents?

"That's better," he said.  "Scarlett, I'm a bad influence on you
and if you have any sense you will send me packing--if you can.
I'm very hard to get rid of.  But I'm bad for you."

"Are you?"

"Can't you see it?  Ever since I met you at the bazaar, your
career has been most shocking and I'm to blame for most of it.
Who encouraged you to dance?  Who forced you to admit that you
thought our glorious Cause was neither glorious nor sacred?  Who
goaded you into admitting that you thought men were fools to die
for high-sounding principles?  Who has aided you in giving the old
ladies plenty to gossip about?  Who is getting you out of mourning
several years too soon?  And who, to end all this, has lured you
into accepting a gift which no lady can accept and still remain a
lady?"

"You flatter yourself, Captain Butler.  I haven't done anything so
scandalous and I'd have done everything you mentioned without your
aid anyway."

"I doubt that," he said and his face went suddenly quiet and
somber.  "You'd still be the broken-hearted widow of Charles
Hamilton and famed for your good deeds among the wounded.
Eventually, however--"

But she was not listening, for she was regarding herself pleasedly
in the mirror again, thinking she would wear the bonnet to the
hospital this very afternoon and take flowers to the convalescent
officers.

That there was truth in his last words did not occur to her.  She
did not see that Rhett had pried open the prison of her widowhood
and set her free to queen it over unmarried girls when her days as
a belle should have been long past.  Nor did she see that under
his influence she had come a long way from Ellen's teachings.  The
change had been so gradual, the flouting of one small convention
seeming to have no connection with the flouting of another, and
none of them any connection with Rhett.  She did not realize that,
with his encouragement, she had disregarded many of the sternest
injunctions of her mother concerning the proprieties, forgotten
the difficult lessons in being a lady.

She only saw that the bonnet was the most becoming one she ever
had, that it had not cost her a penny and that Rhett must be in
love with her, whether he admitted it or not.  And she certainly
intended to find a way to make him admit it.



The next day, Scarlett was standing in front of the mirror with a
comb in her hand and her mouth full of hairpins, attempting a new
coiffure which Maybelle, fresh from a visit to her husband in
Richmond, had said was the rage at the Capital.  It was called
"Cats, Rats and Mice" and presented many difficulties.  The hair
was parted in the middle and arranged in three rolls of graduating
size on each side of the head, the largest, nearest the part,
being the "cat."  The "cat" and the "rat" were easy to fix but the
"mice" kept slipping out of her hairpins in an exasperating
manner.  However, she was determined to accomplish it, for Rhett
was coming to supper and he always noticed and commented upon any
innovation of dress or hair.

As she struggled with her bushy, obstinate locks, perspiration
beading her forehead, she heard light running feet in the
downstairs hall and knew that Melanie was home from the hospital.
As she heard her fly up the stairs, two at a time, she paused,
hairpin in mid-air, realizing that something must be wrong, for
Melanie always moved as decorously as a dowager.  She went to the
door and threw it open, and Melanie ran in, her face flushed and
frightened, looking like a guilty child.

There were tears on her cheeks, her bonnet was hanging on her neck
by the ribbons and her hoops swaying violently.  She was clutching
something in her hand, and the reek of heavy cheap perfume came
into the room with her.

"Oh, Scarlett!" she cried, shutting the door and sinking on the
bed.  "Is Auntie home yet?  She isn't?  Oh, thank the Lord!
Scarlett, I'm so mortified I could die!  I nearly swooned and,
Scarlett, Uncle Peter is threatening to tell Aunt Pitty!"

"Tell what?"

"That I was talking to that--to Miss--Mrs.--"  Melanie fanned her
hot face with her handkerchief.  "That woman with red hair, named
Belle Watling!"

"Why, Melly!" cried Scarlett, so shocked she could only stare.

Belle Watling was the red-haired woman she had seen on the street
the first day she came to Atlanta and by now, she was easily the
most notorious woman in town.  Many prostitutes had flocked into
Atlanta, following the soldiers, but Belle stood out above the
rest, due to her flaming hair and the gaudy, overly fashionable
dresses she wore.  She was seldom seen on Peachtree Street or in
any nice neighborhood, but when she did appear respectable women
made haste to cross the street to remove themselves from her
vicinity.  And Melanie had been talking with her.  No wonder Uncle
Peter was outraged.

"I shall die if Aunt Pitty finds out!  You know she'll cry and
tell everybody in town and I'll be disgraced," sobbed Melanie.
"And it wasn't my fault.  I--I couldn't run away from her.  It
would have been so rude.  Scarlett, I--I felt sorry for her.  Do
you think I'm bad for feeling that way?"

But Scarlett was not concerned with the ethics of the matter.
Like most innocent and well-bred young women, she had a devouring
curiosity about prostitutes.

"What did she want?  What does she talk like?"

"Oh, she used awful grammar but I could see she was trying so hard
to be elegant, poor thing.  I came out of the hospital and Uncle
Peter and the carriage weren't waiting, so I thought I'd walk
home.  And when I went by the Emersons' yard, there she was hiding
behind the hedge!  Oh, thank Heaven, the Emersons are in Macon!
And she said, 'Please, Mrs. Wilkes, do speak a minute with me.'  I
don't know how she knew my name.  I knew I ought to run as hard as
I could but--well, Scarlett, she looked so sad and--well, sort of
pleading.  And she had on a black dress and black bonnet and no
paint and really looked decent but for that red hair.  And before
I could answer she said.  'I know I shouldn't speak to you but I
tried to talk to that old peahen, Mrs. Elsing, and she ran me away
from the hospital.'"

"Did she really call her a peahen?" said Scarlett pleasedly and
laughed.

"Oh, don't laugh.  It isn't funny.  It seems that Miss--this
woman, wanted to do something for the hospital--can you imagine
it?  She offered to nurse every morning and, of course, Mrs.
Elsing must have nearly died at the idea and ordered her out of
the hospital.  And then she said, 'I want to do something, too.
Ain't I a Confedrut, good as you?'  And, Scarlett, I was right
touched at her wanting to help.  You know, she can't be all bad if
she wants to help the Cause.  Do you think I'm bad to feel that
way?"

"For Heaven's sake, Melly, who cares if you're bad?  What else did
she say?"

"She said she'd been watching the ladies go by to the hospital and
thought I had--a--a kind face and so she stopped me.  She had some
money and she wanted me to take it and use it for the hospital and
not tell a soul where it came from.  She said Mrs. Elsing wouldn't
let it be used if she knew what kind of money it was.  What kind
of money!  That's when I thought I'd swoon!  And I was so upset
and anxious to get away, I just said:  'Oh, yes, indeed, how sweet
of you' or something idiotic, and she smiled and said:  'That's
right Christian of you' and shoved this dirty handkerchief into my
hand.  Ugh, can you smell the perfume?"

Melanie held out a man's handkerchief, soiled and highly perfumed,
in which some coins were knotted.

"She was saying thank you and something about bringing me some
money every week and just then Uncle Peter drove up and saw me!"
Melly collapsed into tears and laid her head on the pillow.  "And
when he saw who was with me, he--Scarlett, he HOLLERED at me!
Nobody has ever hollered at me before in my whole life.  And he
said, 'You git in dis hyah cah'ige dis minute!'  Of course, I did,
and all the way home he blessed me out and wouldn't let me explain
and said he was going to tell Aunt Pitty.  Scarlett, do go down
and beg him not to tell her.  Perhaps he will listen to you.  It
will kill Auntie if she knows I ever even looked that woman in the
face.  Will you?"

"Yes, I will.  But let's see how much money is in here.  It feels
heavy."

She untied the knot and a handful of gold coins rolled out on the
bed.

"Scarlett, there's fifty dollars here!  And in gold!" cried
Melanie, awed, as she counted the bright pieces.  "Tell me, do you
think it's all right to use this kind--well, money made--er--this
way for the boys?  Don't you think that maybe God will understand
that she wanted to help and won't care if it is tainted?  When I
think of how many things the hospital needs--"

But Scarlett was not listening.  She was looking at the dirty
handkerchief, and humiliation and fury were filling her.  There
was a monogram in the corner in which were the initials "R. K. B."
In her top drawer was a handkerchief just like this, one that
Rhett Butler had lent her only yesterday to wrap about the stems
of wild flowers they had picked.  She had planned to return it to
him when he came to supper tonight.

So Rhett consorted with that vile Watling creature and gave her
money.  That was where the contribution to the hospital came from.
Blockade gold.  And to think that Rhett would have the gall to
look a decent woman in the face after being with that creature!
And to think that she could have believed he was in love with her!
This proved he couldn't be.

Bad women and all they involved were mysterious and revolting
matters to her.  She knew that men patronized these women for
purposes which no lady should mention--or, if she did mention
them, in whispers and by indirection and euphemism.  She had
always thought that only common vulgar men visited such women.
Before this moment, it had never occurred to her that nice men--
that is, men she met at nice homes and with whom she danced--could
possibly do such things.  It opened up an entirely new field of
thought and one that was horrifying.  Perhaps all men did this!
It was bad enough that they forced their wives to go through such
indecent performances but to actually seek out low women and pay
them for such accommodation!  Oh, men were so vile, and Rhett
Butler was the worst of them all!

She would take this handkerchief and fling it in his face and show
him the door and never, never speak to him again.  But no, of
course she couldn't do that.  She could never, never let him know
she even realized that bad women existed, much less that he
visited them.  A lady could never do that.

"Oh," she thought in fury.  "If I just wasn't a lady, what
wouldn't I tell that varmint!"

And, crumbling the handkerchief in her hand, she went down the
stairs to the kitchen in search of Uncle Peter.  As she passed the
stove, she shoved the handkerchief into the flames and with
impotent anger watched it burn.




CHAPTER XIV


Hope was rolling high in every Southern heart as the summer of 1863
came in.  Despite privation and hardships, despite food speculators
and kindred scourges, despite death and sickness and suffering
which had now left their mark on nearly every family, the South was
again saying "One more victory and the war is over," saying it with
even more happy assurance than in the summer before.  The Yankees
were proving a hard nut to crack but they were cracking at last.

Christmas of 1862 had been a happy one for Atlanta, for the whole
South.  The Confederacy had scored a smashing victory, at
Fredericksburg and the Yankee dead and wounded were counted in the
thousands.  There was universal rejoicing in that holiday season,
rejoicing and thankfulness that the tide was turning.  The army in
butternut were now seasoned fighters, their generals had proven
their mettle, and everyone knew that when the campaign reopened in
the spring, the Yankees would be crushed for good and all.

Spring came and the fighting recommenced.  May came and the
Confederacy won another great victory at Chancellorsville.  The
South roared with elation.

Closer at home, a Union cavalry dash into Georgia had been turned
into a Confederate triumph.  Folks were still laughing and slapping
each other on the back and saying:  "Yes, sir!  When old Nathan
Bedford Forrest gets after them, they better git!"  Late in April,
Colonel Streight and eighteen hundred Yankee cavalry had made a
surprise raid into Georgia, aiming at Rome, only a little more than
sixty miles north of Atlanta.  They had ambitious plans to cut the
vitally important railroad between Atlanta and Tennessee and then
swing southward into Atlanta to destroy the factories and the war
supplies concentrated there in that key city of the Confederacy.

It was a bold stroke and it would have cost the South dearly,
except for Forrest.  With only one-third as many men--but what men
and what riders!--he had started after them, engaged them before
they even reached Rome, harassed them day and night and finally
captured the entire force!

The news reached Atlanta almost simultaneously with the news of the
victory at Chancellorsville, and the town fairly rocked with
exultation and with laughter.  Chancellorsville might be a more
important victory but the capture of Streight's raiders made the
Yankees positively ridiculous.

"No, sir, they'd better not fool with old Forrest," Atlanta said
gleefully as the story was told over and over.

The tide of the Confederacy's fortune was running strong and full
now, sweeping the people jubilantly along on its flood.  True, the
Yankees under Grant had been besieging Vicksburg since the middle
of May.  True, the South had suffered a sickening loss when
Stonewall Jackson had been fatally wounded at Chancellorsville.
True, Georgia had lost one of her bravest and most brilliant sons
when General T. R. R. Cobb had been killed at Fredericksburg.  But
the Yankees just couldn't stand any more defeats like Fredericksburg
and Chancellorsville.  They'd have to give in, and then this cruel
war would be over.

The first days of July came and with them the rumor, later
confirmed by dispatches, that Lee was marching into Pennsylvania.
Lee in the enemy's territory!  Lee forcing battle!  This was the
last fight of the war!

Atlanta was wild with excitement, pleasure and a hot thirst for
vengeance.  Now the Yankees would know what it meant to have the
war carried into their own country.  Now they'd know what it meant
to have fertile fields stripped, horses and cattle stolen, houses
burned, old men and boys dragged off to prison and women and
children turned out to starve.

Everyone knew what the Yankees had done in Missouri, Kentucky,
Tennessee and Virginia.  Even small children could recite with hate
and fear the horrors the Yankees had inflicted upon the conquered
territory.  Already Atlanta was full of refugees from east
Tennessee, and the town had heard firsthand stories from them of
what suffering they had gone through.  In that section, the
Confederate sympathizers were in the minority and the hand of war
fell heavily upon them, as it did on all the border states,
neighbor informing against neighbor and brother killing brother.
These refugees cried out to see Pennsylvania one solid sheet of
flame, and even the gentlest of old ladies wore expressions of grim
pleasure.

But when the news trickled back that Lee had issued orders that no
private property in Pennsylvania should be touched, that looting
would be punished by death and that the army would pay for every
article it requisitioned--then it needed all the reverence the
General had earned to save his popularity.  Not turn the men loose
in the rich storehouses of that prosperous state?  What was General
Lee thinking of?  And our boys so hungry and needing shoes and
clothes and horses!

A hasty note from Darcy Meade to the doctor, the only first-hand
information Atlanta received during those first days of July, was
passed from hand to hand, with mounting indignation.

"Pa, could you manage to get me a pair of boots?  I've been
barefooted for two weeks now and I don't see any prospects of
getting another pair.  If I didn't have such big feet I could get
them off dead Yankees like the other boys, but I've never yet found
a Yankee whose feet were near as big as mine.  If you can get me
some, don't mail them.  Somebody would steal them on the way and I
wouldn't blame them.  Put Phil on the train and send him up with
them.  I'll write you soon, where we'll be.  Right now I don't
know, except that we're marching north.  We're in Maryland now and
everybody says we're going on into Pennsylvania. . . .

"Pa, I thought that we'd give the Yanks a taste of their own
medicine but the General says No, and personally I don't care to
get shot just for the pleasure of burning some Yank's house.  Pa,
today we marched through the grandest cornfields you ever saw.  We
don't have corn like this down home.  Well, I must admit we did a
bit of private looting in that corn, for we were all pretty hungry
and what the General don't know won't hurt him.  But that green
corn didn't do us a bit of good.  All the boys have got dysentery
anyway, and that corn made it worse.  It's easier to walk with a
leg wound than with dysentery.  Pa, do try to manage some boots for
me.  I'm a captain now and a captain ought to have boots, even if
he hasn't got a new uniform or epaulets."

But the army was in Pennsylvania--that was all that mattered.  One
more victory and the war would be over, and then Darcy Meade could
have all the boots he wanted, and the boys would come marching home
and everybody would be happy again.  Mrs. Meade's eyes grew wet as
she pictured her soldier son home at last, home to stay.

On the third of July, a sudden silence fell on the wires from the
north, a silence that lasted till midday of the fourth when
fragmentary and garbled reports began to trickle into headquarters
in Atlanta.  There had been hard fighting in Pennsylvania, near a
little town named Gettysburg, a great battle with all Lee's army
massed.  The news was uncertain, slow in coming, for the battle had
been fought in the enemy's territory and the reports came first
through Maryland, were relayed to Richmond and then to Atlanta.

Suspense grew and the beginnings of dread slowly crawled over the
town.  Nothing was so bad as not knowing what was happening.
Families with sons at the front prayed fervently that their boys
were not in Pennsylvania, but those who knew their relatives were
in the same regiment with Darcy Meade clamped their teeth and said
it was an honor for them to be in the big fight that would lick the
Yankees for good and all.

In Aunt Pitty's house, the three women looked into one another's
eyes with fear they could not conceal.  Ashley was in Darcy's
regiment.

On the fifth came evil tidings, not from the North but from the
West.  Vicksburg had fallen, fallen after a long and bitter siege,
and practically all the Mississippi River, from St. Louis to New
Orleans was in the hands of the Yankees.  The Confederacy had been
cut in two.  At any other time, the news of this disaster would
have brought fear and lamentation to Atlanta.  But now they could
give little thought to Vicksburg.  They were thinking of Lee in
Pennsylvania, forcing battle.  Vicksburg's loss would be no
catastrophe if Lee won in the East.  There lay Philadelphia, New
York, Washington.  Their capture would paralyze the North and more
than cancel off the defeat on the Mississippi.

The hours dragged by and the black shadow of calamity brooded over
the town, obscuring the hot sun until people looked up startled
into the sky as if incredulous that it was clear and blue instead
of murky and heavy with scudding clouds.  Everywhere, women
gathered in knots, huddled in groups on front porches, on
sidewalks, even in the middle of the streets, telling each other
that no news is good news, trying to comfort each other, trying to
present a brave appearance.  But hideous rumors that Lee was
killed, the battle lost, and enormous casualty lists coming in,
fled up and down the quiet streets like darting bats.  Though they
tried not to believe, whole neighborhoods, swayed by panic, rushed
to town, to the newspapers, to headquarters, pleading for news, any
news, even bad news.

Crowds formed at the depot, hoping for news from incoming trains,
at the telegraph office, in front of the harried headquarters,
before the locked doors of the newspapers.  They were oddly still
crowds, crowds that quietly grew larger and larger.  There was no
talking.  Occasionally an old man's treble voice begged for news,
and instead of inciting the crowd to babbling it only intensified
the hush as they heard the oft-repeated:  "Nothing on the wires yet
from the North except that there's been fighting."  The fringe of
women on foot and in carriages grew greater and greater, and the
heat of the close-packed bodies and dust rising from restless feet
were suffocating.  The women did not speak, but their pale set
faces pleaded with a mute eloquence that was louder than wailing.

There was hardly a house in town that had not sent away a son, a
brother, a father, a lover, a husband, to this battle.  They all
waited to hear the news that death had come to their homes.  They
expected death.  They did not expect defeat.  That thought they
dismissed.  Their men might be dying, even now, on the sun-parched
grass of the Pennsylvania hills.  Even now the Southern ranks might
be falling like grain before a hailstorm, but the Cause for which
they fought could never fall.  They might be dying in thousands
but, like the fruit of the dragon's teeth, thousands of fresh men
in gray and butternut with the Rebel yell on their lips would
spring up from the earth to take their places.  Where these men
would come from, no one knew.  They only knew, as surely as they
knew there was a just and jealous God in Heaven, that Lee was
miraculous and the Army of Virginia invincible.



Scarlett, Melanie and Miss Pittypat sat in front of the Daily
Examiner office in the carriage with the top back, sheltered
beneath their parasols.  Scarlett's hands shook so that her parasol
wobbled above her head, Pitty was so excited her nose quivered in
her round face like a rabbit's, but Melanie sat as though carved of
stone, her dark eyes growing larger and larger as time went by.
She made only one remark in two hours, as she took a vial of
smelling salts from her reticule and handed it to her aunt, the
only time she had ever spoken to her, in her whole life, with
anything but tenderest affection.

"Take this, Auntie, and use it if you feel faint.  I warn you if
you do faint you'll just have to faint and let Uncle Peter take you
home, for I'm not going to leave this place till I hear about--till
I hear.  And I'm not going to let Scarlett leave me, either."

Scarlett had no intention of leaving, no intention of placing
herself where she could not have the first news of Ashley.  No,
even if Miss Pitty died, she wouldn't leave this spot.  Somewhere,
Ashley was fighting, perhaps dying, and the newspaper office was
the only place where she could learn the truth.

She looked about the crowd, picking out friends and neighbors, Mrs.
Meade with her bonnet askew and her arm through that of fifteen-
year-old Phil; the Misses McLure trying to make their trembling
upper lips cover their buck teeth; Mrs. Elsing, erect as a Spartan
mother, betraying her inner turmoil only by the straggling gray
locks that hung from her chignon; and Fanny Elsing white as a
ghost.  (Surely Fanny wouldn't be so worried about her brother
Hugh.  Had she a real beau at the front that no one suspected?)
Mrs. Merriwether sat in her carriage patting Maybelle's hand.
Maybelle looked so very pregnant it was a disgrace for her to be
out in public, even if she did have her shawl carefully draped over
her.  Why should she be so worried?  Nobody had heard that the
Louisiana troops were in Pennsylvania.  Probably her hairy little
Zouave was safe in Richmond this very minute.

There was a movement on the outskirts of the crowd and those on
foot gave way as Rhett Butler carefully edged his horse toward Aunt
Pitty's carriage.  Scarlett thought:  He's got courage, coming here
at this time when it wouldn't take anything to make this mob tear
him to pieces because he isn't in uniform.  As he came nearer, she
thought she might be the first to rend him.  How dared he sit there
on that fine horse, in shining boots and handsome white linen suit,
so sleek and well fed, smoking an expensive cigar, when Ashley and
all the other boys were fighting the Yankees, barefooted,
sweltering in the heat, hungry, their bellies rotten with disease?

Bitter looks were thrown at him as he came slowly through the
press.  Old men growled in their beards, and Mrs. Merriwether who
feared nothing rose slightly in her carriage and said clearly:
"Speculator!" in a tone that made the word the foulest and most
venomous of epithets.  He paid no heed to anyone but raised his hat
to Melly and Aunt Pitty and, riding to Scarlett's side, leaned down
and whispered:  "Don't you think this would be the time for Dr.
Meade to give us his familiar speech about victory perching like a
screaming eagle on our banners?"

Her nerves taut with suspense, she turned on him as swiftly as an
angry cat, hot words bubbling to her lips, but he stopped them with
a gesture.

"I came to tell you ladies," he said loudly, "that I have been to
headquarters and the first casualty lists are coming in."

At these words a hum rose among those near enough to hear his
remark, and the crowd surged, ready to turn and run down Whitehall
Street toward headquarters.

"Don't go," he called, rising in his saddle and holding up his
hand.  "The lists have been sent to both newspapers and are now
being printed.  Stay where you are!"

"Oh, Captain Butler," cried Melly, turning to him with tears in her
eyes.  "How kind of you to come and tell us!  When will they be
posted?"

"They should be out any minute, Madam.  The reports have been in
the offices for half an hour now.  The major in charge didn't want
to let that out until the printing was done, for fear the crowd
would wreck the offices trying to get news.  Ah!  Look!"

The side window of the newspaper office opened and a hand was
extended, bearing a sheaf of long narrow galley proofs, smeared
with fresh ink and thick with names closely printed.  The crowd
fought for them, tearing the slips in half, those obtaining them
trying to back out through the crowd to read, those behind pushing
forward, crying:  "Let me through!"

"Hold the reins," said Rhett shortly, swinging to the ground and
tossing the bridle to Uncle Peter.  They saw his heavy shoulders
towering above the crowd as he went through, brutally pushing and
shoving.  In a while he was back, with half a dozen in his hands.
He tossed one to Melanie and distributed the others among the
ladies in the nearest carriages, the Misses McLure, Mrs. Meade,
Mrs. Merriwether, Mrs. Elsing.

"Quick, Melly," cried Scarlett, her heart in her throat,
exasperation sweeping her as she saw that Melly's hands were
shaking so that it was impossible for her to read.

"Take it," whispered Melly, and Scarlett snatched it from her.  The
Ws.  Where were the Ws?  Oh, there they were at the bottom and all
smeared up.  "White," she read and her voice shook, "Wilkens . . .
Winn . . . Zebulon . . . Oh, Melly, he's not on it!  He's not on
it!  Oh, for God's sake, Auntie, Melly, pick up the salts!  Hold
her up, Melly."

Melly, weeping openly with happiness, steadied Miss Pitty's rolling
head and held the smelling salts under her nose.  Scarlett braced
the fat old lady on the other side, her heart singing with joy.
Ashley was alive.  He wasn't even wounded.  How good God was to
pass him by!  How--

She heard a low moan and, turning, saw Fanny Elsing lay her head on
her mother's bosom, saw the casualty list flutter to the floor of
the carriage, saw Mrs. Elsing's thin lips quiver as she gathered
her daughter in her arms and said quietly to the coachman:  "Home.
Quickly."  Scarlett took a quick glance at the lists.  Hugh Elsing
was not listed.  Fanny must have had a beau and now he was dead.
The crowd made way in sympathetic silence for the Elsings'
carriage, and after them followed the little wicker pony cart of
the McLure girls.  Miss Faith was driving, her face like a rock,
and for once, her teeth were covered by her lips.  Miss Hope, death
in her face, sat erect beside her, holding her sister's skirt in a
tight grasp.  They looked like very old women.  Their young brother
Dallas was their darling and the only relative the maiden ladies
had in the world.  Dallas was gone.

"Melly!  Melly!" cried Maybelle, joy in her voice, "Rene is safe!
And Ashley, too!  Oh, thank God!"  The shawl had slipped from her
shoulders and her condition was most obvious but, for once, neither
she nor Mrs. Merriwether cared.  "Oh, Mrs. Meade!  Rene--"  Her
voice changed, swiftly, "Melly, look!--Mrs. Meade, please!  Darcy
isn't--?"

Mrs. Meade was looking down into her lap and she did not raise her
head when her name was called, but the face of little Phil beside
her was an open book that all might read.

"There, there, Mother," he said, helplessly.  Mrs. Meade looked up,
meeting Melanie's eyes.

"He won't need those boots now," she said.

"Oh, darling!" cried Melly, beginning to sob, as she shoved Aunt
Pitty onto Scarlett's shoulder and scrambled out of the carriage
and toward that of the doctor's wife.

"Mother, you've still got me," said Phil, in a forlorn effort at
comforting the white-faced woman beside him.  "And if you'll just
let me, I'll go kill all the Yank--"

Mrs. Meade clutched his arm as if she would never let it go, said
"No!" in a strangled voice and seemed to choke.

"Phil Meade, you hush your mouth!" hissed Melanie, climbing in
beside Mrs. Meade and taking her in her arms.  "Do you think it'll
help your mother to have you off getting shot too?  I never heard
anything so silly.  Drive us home, quick!"

She turned to Scarlett as Phil picked up the reins.

"As soon as you take Auntie home, come over to Mrs. Meade's.
Captain Butler, can you get word to the doctor?  He's at the
hospital."

The carriage moved off through the dispersing crowd.  Some of the
women were weeping with joy, but most looked too stunned to realize
the heavy blows that had fallen upon them.  Scarlett bent her head
over the blurred lists, reading rapidly, to find names of friends.
Now that Ashley was safe she could think of other people.  Oh, how
long the list was!  How heavy the toll from Atlanta, from all of
Georgia.

Good Heavens!  "Calvert--Raiford, Lieutenant."  Raif!  Suddenly she
remembered the day, so long ago, when they had run away together
but decided to come home at nightfall because they were hungry and
afraid of the dark.

"Fontaine--Joseph K., private."  Little bad-tempered Joe!  And
Sally hardly over having her baby!

"Munroe--LaFayette, Captain."  And Lafe had been engaged to
Cathleen Calvert.  Poor Cathleen!  Hers had been a double loss, a
brother and a sweetheart.  But Sally's loss was greater--a brother
and a husband.

Oh, this was too terrible.  She was almost afraid to read further.
Aunt Pitty was heaving and sighing on her shoulder and, with small
ceremony, Scarlett pushed her over into a corner of the carriage
and continued her reading.

Surely, surely--there couldn't be three "Tarleton" names on that
list.  Perhaps--perhaps the hurried printer had repeated the name
by error.  But no.  There they were.  "Tarleton--Brenton,
Lieutenant."  "Tarleton--Stuart, Corporal."  "Tarleton--Thomas,
private."  And Boyd, dead the first year of the war, was buried God
knew where in Virginia.  All the Tarleton boys gone.  Tom and the
lazy long-legged twins with their love of gossip and their absurd
practical jokes and Boyd who had the grace of a dancing master and
the tongue of a wasp.

She could not read any more.  She could not know if any other of
those boys with whom she had grown up, danced, flirted, kissed were
on that list.  She wished that she could cry, do something to ease
the iron fingers that were digging into her throat.

"I'm sorry, Scarlett," said Rhett.  She looked up at him.  She had
forgotten he was still there.  "Many of your friends?"

She nodded and struggled to speak:  "About every family in the
County--and all--all three of the Tarleton boys."

His face was quiet, almost somber, and there was no mocking in his
eyes.

"And the end is not yet," he said.  "These are just the first lists
and they're incomplete.  There'll be a longer list tomorrow."  He
lowered his voice so that those in the near-by carriages could not
hear.  "Scarlett, General Lee must have lost the battle.  I heard
at headquarters that he had retreated back into Maryland."

She raised frightened eyes to his, but her fear did not spring from
Lee's defeat.  Longer casualty lists tomorrow!  Tomorrow.  She had
not thought of tomorrow, so happy was she at first that Ashley's
name was not on that list.  Tomorrow.  Why, right this minute he
might be dead and she would not know it until tomorrow, or perhaps
a week from tomorrow.

"Oh, Rhett, why do there have to be wars?  It would have been so
much better for the Yankees to pay for the darkies--or even for us
to give them the darkies free of charge than to have this happen."

"It isn't the darkies, Scarlett.  They're just the excuse.
There'll always be wars because men love wars.  Women don't, but
men do--yea, passing the love of women."

His mouth twisted in his old smile and the seriousness was gone
from his face.  He lifted his wide Panama hat.

"Good-by.  I'm going to find Dr. Meade.  I imagine the irony of me
being the one to tell him of his son's death will be lost on him,
just now.  But later, he'll probably hate to think that a
speculator brought the news of a hero's death."



Scarlett put Miss Pitty to bed with a toddy, left Prissy and Cookie
in attendance and went down the street to the Meade house.  Mrs.
Meade was upstairs with Phil, waiting her husband's return, and
Melanie sat in the parlor, talking in a low voice to a group of
sympathetic neighbors.  She was busy with needle and scissors,
altering a mourning dress that Mrs. Elsing had lent to Mrs. Meade.
Already the house was full of the acrid smell of clothes boiling in
homemade black dye for, in the kitchen, the sobbing cook was
stirring all of Mrs. Meade's dresses in the huge wash pot.

"How is she?" questioned Scarlett softly.

"Not a tear," said Melanie.  "It's terrible when women can't cry.
I don't know how men stand things without crying.  I guess it's
because they're stronger and braver than women.  She says she's
going to Pennsylvania by herself to bring him home.  The doctor
can't leave the hospital."

"It will be dreadful for her!  Why can't Phil go?"

"She's afraid he'll join the army if he gets out of her sight.  You
know he's so big for his age and they're taking them at sixteen
now."

One by one the neighbors slipped away, reluctant to be present when
the doctor came home, and Scarlett and Melanie were left alone,
sewing in the parlor.  Melanie looked sad but tranquil, though
tears dropped down on the cloth she held in her hands.  Evidently
she had not thought that the battle might still be going on and
Ashley perhaps dead at this very moment.  With panic in her heart,
Scarlett did not know whether to tell Melanie of Rhett's words and
have the dubious comfort of her misery or keep it to herself.
Finally she decided to remain quiet.  It would never do for Melanie
to think her too worried about Ashley.  She thanked God that
everyone, Melly and Pitty included, had been too engrossed in her
own worries that morning to notice her conduct.

After an interval of silent sewing, they heard sounds outside and,
peering through the curtains, they saw Dr. Meade alighting from his
horse.  His shoulders were sagging and his head bowed until his
gray beard spread out fanlike on his chest.  He came slowly into
the house and, laying down his hat and bag, kissed both the girls
silently.  Then he went tiredly up the stairs.  In a moment Phil
came down, all long legs and arms and awkwardness.  The two girls
looked an invitation to join them, but he went onto the front porch
and, seating himself on the top step, dropped his head on his
cupped palm.

Melly sighed.

"He's mad because they won't let him go fight the Yankees.  Fifteen
years old!  Oh, Scarlett, it would be Heaven to have a son like
that!"

"And have him get killed," said Scarlett shortly, thinking of
Darcy.

"It would be better to have a son even if he did get killed than to
never have one," said Melanie and gulped.  "You can't understand,
Scarlett, because you've got little Wade, but I--  Oh, Scarlett, I
want a baby so bad!  I know you think I'm horrid to say it right
out, but it's true and only what every woman wants and you know
it."

Scarlett restrained herself from sniffing.

"If God should will that Ashley should be--taken, I suppose I could
bear it, though I'd rather die if he died.  But God would give me
strength to bear it.  But I could not bear having him dead and not
having--not having a child of his to comfort me.  Oh, Scarlett, how
lucky you are!  Though you lost Charlie, you have his son.  And if
Ashley goes, I'll have nothing.  Scarlett, forgive me, but
sometimes I've been so jealous of you--"

"Jealous--of me?" cried Scarlett, stricken with guilt.

"Because you have a son and I haven't.  I've even pretended
sometimes that Wade was mine because it's so awful not to have a
child."

"Fiddle-dee-dee!" said Scarlett in relief.  She cast a quick glance
at the slight figure with blushing face bent over the sewing.
Melanie might want children but she certainly did not have the
figure for bearing them.  She was hardly taller than a twelve-year-
old child, her hips were as narrow as a child's and her breasts
were very flat.  The very thought of Melanie having a child was
repellent to Scarlett.  It brought up too many thoughts she
couldn't bear thinking.  If Melanie should have a child of
Ashley's, it would be as though something were taken from Scarlett
that was her own.

"Do forgive me for saying that about Wade.  You know I love him so.
You aren't mad at me, are you?"

"Don't be silly," said Scarlett shortly.  "And go out on the porch
and do something for Phil.  He's crying."



CHAPTER XV


The army, driven back into Virginia, went into winter quarters on
the Rapidan--a tired, depleted army since the defeat at Gettysburg--
and as the Christmas season approached, Ashley came home on
furlough.  Scarlett, seeing him for the first time in more than two
years, was frightened by the violence of her feelings.  When she
had stood in the parlor at Twelve Oaks and seen him married to
Melanie, she had thought she could never love him with a more
heartbreaking intensity than she did at that moment.  But now she
knew her feelings of that long-past night were those of a spoiled
child thwarted of a toy.  Now, her emotions were sharpened by her
long dreams of him, heightened by the repression she had been
forced to put on her tongue.

This Ashley Wilkes in his faded, patched uniform, his blond hair
bleached tow by summer suns, was a different man from the easy-
going, drowsy-eyed boy she had loved to desperation before the war.
And he was a thousand times more thrilling.  He was bronzed and
lean now, where he had once been fair and slender, and the long
golden mustache drooping about his mouth, cavalry style, was the
last touch needed to make him the perfect picture of a soldier.

He stood with military straightness in his old uniform, his pistol
in its worn holster, his battered scabbard smartly slapping his
high boots, his tarnished spurs dully gleaming--Major Ashley
Wilkes, C.S.A.  The habit of command sat upon him now, a quiet air
of self-reliance and authority, and grim lines were beginning to
emerge about his mouth.  There was something new and strange about
the square set of his shoulders and the cool bright gleam of his
eyes.  Where he had once been lounging and indolent, he was now as
alert as a prowling cat, with the tense alertness of one whose
nerves are perpetually drawn as tight as the strings of a violin.
In his eyes, there was a fagged, haunted look, and the sunburned
skin was tight across the fine bones of his face--her same handsome
Ashley, yet so very different.

Scarlett had made her plans to spend Christmas at Tara, but after
Ashley's telegram came no power on earth, not even a direct command
from the disappointed Ellen, could drag her away from Atlanta.  Had
Ashley intended going to Twelve Oaks, she would have hastened to
Tara to be near him; but he had written his family to join him in
Atlanta, and Mr. Wilkes and Honey and India were already in town.
Go home to Tara and miss seeing him, after two long years?  Miss
the heart-quickening sound of his voice, miss reading in his eyes
that he had not forgotten her?  Never!  Not for all the mothers in
the world.

Ashley came home four days before Christmas, with a group of the
County boys also on furlough, a sadly diminished group since
Gettysburg.  Cade Calvert was among them, a thin, gaunt Cade, who
coughed continually, two of the Munroe boys, bubbling with the
excitement of their first leave since 1861, and Alex and Tony
Fontaine, splendidly drunk, boisterous and quarrelsome.  The group
had two hours to wait between trains and, as it was taxing the
diplomacy of the sober members of the party to keep the Fontaines
from fighting each other and perfect strangers in the depot, Ashley
brought them all home to Aunt Pittypat's.

"You'd think they'd had enough fighting in Virginia," said Cade
bitterly, as he watched the two bristle like game-cocks over who
should be the first to kiss the fluttering and flattered Aunt
Pitty.  "But no.  They've been drunk and picking fights ever since
we got to Richmond.  The provost guard took them up there and if it
hadn't been for Ashley's slick tongue, they'd have spent Christmas
in jail."

But Scarlett hardly heard a word he said, so enraptured was she at
being in the same room with Ashley again.  How could she have
thought during these two years that other men were nice or handsome
or exciting?  How could she have even endured hearing them make
love to her when Ashley was in the world?  He was home again,
separated from her only by the width of the parlor rug, and it took
all her strength not to dissolve in happy tears every time she
looked at him sitting there on the sofa with Melly on one side and
India on the other and Honey hanging over his shoulder.  If only
she had the right to sit there beside him, her arm through his!  If
only she could pat his sleeve every few minutes to make sure he was
really there, hold his hand and use his handkerchief to wipe away
her tears of joy.  For Melanie was doing all these things,
unashamedly.  Too happy to be shy and reserved, she hung on her
husband's arm and adored him openly with her eyes, with her smiles,
her tears.  And Scarlett was too happy to resent this, too glad to
be jealous.  Ashley was home at last!

Now and then she put her hand up to her cheek where he had kissed
her and felt again the thrill of his lips and smiled at him.  He
had not kissed her first, of course.  Melly had hurled herself into
his arms crying incoherently, holding him as though she would never
let him go.  And then, India and Honey had hugged him, fairly
tearing him from Melanie's arms.  Then he had kissed his father,
with a dignified affectionate embrace that showed the strong quiet
feeling that lay between them.  And then Aunt Pitty, who was
jumping up and down on her inadequate little feet with excitement.
Finally he turned to her, surrounded by all the boys who were
claiming their kisses, and said:  "Oh, Scarlett!  You pretty,
pretty thing!" and kissed her on the cheek.

With that kiss, everything she had intended to say in welcome took
wings.  Not until hours later did she recall that he had not kissed
her on the lips.  Then she wondered feverishly if he would have
done it had she met him alone, bending his tall body over hers,
pulling her up on tiptoe, holding her for a long, long time.  And
because it made her happy to think so, she believed that he would.
But there would be time for all things, a whole week!  Surely she
could maneuver to get him alone and say:  "Do you remember those
rides we used to take down our secret bridle paths?"  "Do you
remember how the moon looked that night when we sat on the steps at
Tara and you quoted that poem?"  (Good Heavens!  What was the name
of that poem, anyway?)  "Do you remember that afternoon when I
sprained my ankle and you carried me home in your arms in the
twilight?"

Oh, there were so many things she would preface with "Do you
remember?"  So many dear memories that would bring back to him
those lovely days when they roamed the County like care-free
children, so many things that would call to mind the days before
Melanie Hamilton entered on the scene.  And while they talked she
could perhaps read in his eyes some quickening of emotion, some
hint that behind the barrier of husbandly affection for Melanie he
still cared, cared as passionately as on that day of the barbecue
when he burst forth with the truth.  It did not occur to her to
plan just what they would do if Ashley should declare his love for
her in unmistakable words.  It would be enough to know that he did
care. . . .  Yes, she could wait, could let Melanie have her happy
hour of squeezing his arm and crying.  Her time would come.  After
all, what did a girl like Melanie know of love?

"Darling, you look like a ragamuffin," said Melanie when the first
excitement of homecoming was over.  "Who did mend your uniform and
why did they use blue patches?"

"I thought I looked perfectly dashing," said Ashley, considering
his appearance.  "Just compare me with those rag-tags over there
and you'll appreciate me more.  Mose mended the uniform and I
thought he did very well, considering that he'd never had a needle
in his hand before the war.  About the blue cloth, when it comes to
a choice between having holes in your britches or patching them
with pieces of a captured Yankee uniform--well, there just isn't
any choice.  And as for looking like a ragamuffin, you should thank
your stars your husband didn't come home barefooted.  Last week my
old boots wore completely out, and I would have come home with
sacks tied on my feet if we hadn't had the good luck to shoot two
Yankee scouts.  The boots of one of them fitted me perfectly."

He stretched out his long legs in their scarred high boots for them
to admire.

"And the boots of the other scout didn't fit me," said Cade.
"They're two sizes too small and they're killing me this minute.
But I'm going home in style just the same."

"And the selfish swine won't give them to either of us," said Tony.
"And they'd fit our small, aristocratic Fontaine feet perfectly.
Hell's afire, I'm ashamed to face Mother in these brogans.  Before
the war she wouldn't have let one of our darkies wear them."

"Don't worry," said Alex, eyeing Cade's boots.  "We'll take them
off of him on the train going home.  I don't mind facing Mother but
I'm da--I mean I don't intend for Dimity Munroe to see my toes
sticking out."

"Why, they're my boots.  I claimed them first," said Tony,
beginning to scowl at his brother; and Melanie, fluttering with
fear at the possibility of one of the famous Fontaine quarrels,
interposed and made peace.

"I had a full beard to show you girls," said Ashley, ruefully
rubbing his face where half-healed razor nicks still showed.  "It
was a beautiful beard and if I do say it myself, neither Jeb Stuart
nor Nathan Bedford Forrest had a handsomer one.  But when we got to
Richmond, those two scoundrels," indicating the Fontaines, "decided
that as they were shaving their beards, mine should come off too.
They got me down and shaved me, and it's a wonder my head didn't
come off along with the beard.  It was only by the intervention of
Evan and Cade that my mustache was saved."

"Snakes, Mrs. Wilkes!  You ought to thank me.  You'd never have
recognized him and wouldn't have let him in the door," said Alex.
"We did it to show our appreciation of his talking the provost
guard out of putting us in jail.  If you say the word, we'll take
the mustache off for you, right now."

"Oh, no, thank you!" said Melanie hastily, clutching Ashley in a
frightened way, for the two swarthy little men looked capable of
any violence.  "I think it's perfectly lovely."

"That's love," said the Fontaines, nodding gravely at each other.

When Ashley went into the cold to see the boys off to the depot in
Aunt Pitty's carriage, Melanie caught Scarlett's arm.

"Isn't his uniform dreadful?  Won't my coat be a surprise?  Oh, if
only I had enough cloth for britches too!"

That coat for Ashley was a sore subject with Scarlett, for she
wished so ardently that she and not Melanie were bestowing it as a
Christmas gift.  Gray wool for uniforms was now almost literally
more priceless than rubies, and Ashley was wearing the familiar
homespun.  Even butternut was now none too plentiful, and many of
the soldiers were dressed in captured Yankee uniforms which had
been turned a dark-brown color with walnut-shell dye.  But Melanie,
by rare luck, had come into possession of enough gray broadcloth to
make a coat--a rather short coat but a coat just the same.  She had
nursed a Charleston boy in the hospital and when he died had
clipped a lock of his hair and sent it to his mother, along with
the scant contents of his pockets and a comforting account of his
last hours which made no mention of the torment in which he died.
A correspondence had sprung up between them and, learning that
Melanie had a husband at the front, the mother had sent her the
length of gray cloth and brass buttons which she had bought for her
dead son.  It was a beautiful piece of material, thick and warm and
with a dull sheen to it, undoubtedly blockade goods and undoubtedly
very expensive.  It was now in the hands of the tailor and Melanie
was hurrying him to have it ready by Christmas morning.  Scarlett
would have given anything to be able to provide the rest of the
uniform, but the necessary materials were simply not to be had in
Atlanta.

She had a Christmas present for Ashley, but it paled in
insignificance beside the glory of Melanie's gray coat.  It was a
small "housewife," made of flannel, containing the whole precious
pack of needles Rhett had brought her from Nassau, three of her
linen handkerchiefs, obtained from the same source, two spools of
thread and a small pair of scissors.  But she wanted to give him
something more personal, something a wife could give a husband, a
shirt, a pair of gauntlets, a hat.  Oh, yes, a hat by all means.
That little flat-topped forage cap Ashley was wearing looked
ridiculous.  Scarlett had always hated them.  What if Stonewall
Jackson had worn one in preference to a slouch felt?  That didn't
make them any more dignified looking.  But the only hats obtainable
in Atlanta were crudely made wool hats, and they were tackier than
the monkey-hat forage caps.

When she thought of hats, she thought of Rhett Butler.  He had so
many hats, wide Panamas for summer, tall beavers for formal
occasions, hunting hats, slouch hats of tan and black and blue.
What need had he for so many when her darling Ashley rode in the
rain with moisture dripping down his collar from the back of his
cap?

"I'll make Rhett give me that new black felt of his," she decided.
"And I'll put a gray ribbon around the brim and sew Ashley's wreath
on it and it will look lovely."

She paused and thought it might be difficult to get the hat without
some explanation.  She simply could not tell Rhett she wanted it
for Ashley.  He would raise his brows in that nasty way he always
had when she even mentioned Ashley's name and, like as not, would
refuse to give her the hat.  Well, she'd make up some pitiful story
about a soldier in the hospital who needed it and Rhett need never
know the truth.

All that afternoon, she maneuvered to be alone with Ashley, even
for a few minutes, but Melanie was beside him constantly, and India
and Honey, their pale lashless eyes glowing, followed him about the
house.  Even John Wilkes, visibly proud of his son, had no
opportunity for quiet conversation with him.

It was the same at supper where they all plied him with questions
about the war.  The war!  Who cared about the war?  Scarlett didn't
think Ashley cared very much for that subject either.  He talked at
length, laughed frequently and dominated the conversation more
completely than she had ever seen him do before, but he seemed to
say very little.  He told them jokes and funny stories about
friends, talked gaily about makeshifts, making light of hunger and
long marches in the rain, and described in detail how General Lee
had looked when he rode by on the retreat from Gettysburg and
questioned:  "Gentlemen, are you Georgia troops?  Well, we can't
get along without you Georgians!"

It seemed to Scarlett that he was talking fervishly to keep them
from asking questions he did not want to answer.  When she saw his
eyes falter and drop before the long, troubled gaze of his father,
a faint worry and bewilderment rose in her as to what was hidden in
Ashley's heart.  But it soon passed, for there was no room in her
mind for anything except a radiant happiness and a driving desire
to be alone with him.

That radiance lasted until everyone in the circle about the open
fire began to yawn, and Mr. Wilkes and the girls took their
departure for the hotel.  Then as Ashley and Melanie and Pittypat
and Scarlett mounted the stairs, lighted by Uncle Peter, a chill
fell on her spirit.  Until that moment when they stood in the
upstairs hall, Ashley had been hers, only hers, even if she had not
had a private word with him that whole afternoon.  But now, as she
said good night, she saw that Melanie's cheeks were suddenly
crimson and she was trembling.  Her eyes were on the carpet and,
though she seemed overcome with some frightening emotion, she
seemed shyly happy.  Melanie did not even look up when Ashley
opened the bedroom door, but sped inside.  Ashley said good night
abruptly, and he did not meet Scarlett's eyes either.

The door closed behind them, leaving Scarlett open mouthed and
suddenly desolate.  Ashley was no longer hers.  He was Melanie's.
And as long as Melanie lived, she could go into rooms with Ashley
and close the door--and close out the rest of the world.

Now Ashley was going away, back to Virginia, back to the long
marches in the sleet, to hungry bivouacs in the snow, to pain and
hardship and to the risk of all the bright beauty of his golden
head and proud slender body being blotted out in an instant, like
an ant beneath a careless heel.  The past week with its shimmering,
dreamlike beauty, its crowded hours of happiness, was gone.

The week had passed swiftly, like a dream, a dream fragrant with
the smell of pine boughs and Christmas trees, bright with little
candles and home-made tinsel, a dream where minutes flew as rapidly
as heartbeats.  Such a breathless week when something within her
drove Scarlett with mingled pain and pleasure to pack and cram
every minute with incidents to remember after he was gone,
happenings which she could examine at leisure in the long months
ahead, extracting every morsel of comfort from them--dance, sing,
laugh, fetch and carry for Ashley, anticipate his wants, smile when
he smiles, be silent when he talks, follow him with your eyes so
that each line of his erect body, each lift of his eyebrows, each
quirk of his mouth, will be indelibly printed on your mind--for a
week goes by so fast and the war goes on forever.

She sat on the divan in the parlor, holding her going-away gift for
him in her lap, waiting while he said good-by to Melanie, praying
that when he did come down the stairs he would be alone and she
might be granted by Heaven a few moments alone with him.  Her ears
strained for sounds from upstairs, but the house was oddly still,
so still that even the sound of her breathing seemed loud.  Aunt
Pittypat was crying into her pillows in her room, for Ashley had
told her good-by half an hour before.  No sounds of murmuring
voices or of tears came from behind the closed door of Melanie's
bedroom.  It seemed to Scarlett that he had been in that room for
hours, and she resented bitterly each moment that he stayed, saying
good-by to his wife, for the moments were slipping by so fast and
his time was so short.

She thought of all the things she had intended to say to him during
this week.  But there had been no opportunity to say them, and she
knew now that perhaps she would never have the chance to say them.

Such foolish little things, some of them:  "Ashley, you will be
careful, won't you?"  "Please don't get your feet wet.  You take
cold so easily."  "Don't forget to put a newspaper across your
chest under your shirt.  It keeps out the wind so well."  But there
were other things, more important things she had wanted to say,
much more important things she had wanted to hear him say, things
she had wanted to read in his eyes, even if he did not speak them.

So many things to say and now there was no time!  Even the few
minutes that remained might be snatched away from her if Melanie
followed him to the door, to the carriage block.  Why hadn't she
made the opportunity during this last week?  But always, Melanie
was at his side, her eyes caressing him adoringly, always friends
and neighbors and relatives were in the house and, from morning
till night, Ashley was never alone.  Then, at night, the door of
the bedroom closed and he was alone with Melanie.  Never once
during these last days had he betrayed to Scarlett by one look, one
word, anything but the affection a brother might show a sister or a
friend, a lifelong friend.  She could not let him go away, perhaps
forever, without knowing whether he still loved her.  Then, even if
he died, she could nurse the warm comfort of his secret love to the
end of her days.

After what seemed an eternity of waiting, she heard the sound of
his boots in the bedroom above and the door opening and closing.
She heard him coming down the steps.  Alone!  Thank God for that!
Melanie must be too overcome by the grief of parting to leave her
room.  Now she would have him for herself for a few precious
minutes.

He came down the steps slowly, his spurs clinking, and she could
hear the slap-slap of his saber against his high boots.  When he
came into the parlor, his eyes were somber.  He was trying to smile
but his face was as white and drawn as a man bleeding from an
internal wound.  She rose as he entered, thinking with proprietary
pride that he was the handsomest soldier she had ever seen.  His
long holster and belt glistened and his silver spurs and scabbard
gleamed, from the industrious polishing Uncle Peter had given them.
His new coat did not fit very well, for the tailor had been hurried
and some of the seams were awry.  The bright new sheen of the gray
coat was sadly at variance with the worn and patched butternut
trousers and the scarred boots, but if he had been clothed in
silver armor he could not have looked more the shining knight to
her.

"Ashley," she begged abruptly, "may I go to the train with you?"

"Please don't.  Father and the girls will be there.  And anyway,
I'd rather remember you saying good-by to me here than shivering at
the depot.  There's so much to memories."

Instantly she abandoned her plan.  If India and Honey who disliked
her so much were to be present at the leave taking, she would have
no chance for a private word.

"Then I won't go," she said.  "See, Ashley!  I've another present
for you."

A little shy, now that the time had come to give it to him, she
unrolled the package.  It was a long yellow sash, made of thick
China silk and edged with heavy fringe.  Rhett Butler had brought
her a yellow shawl from Havana several months before, a shawl
gaudily embroidered with birds and flowers in magenta and blue.
During this last week, she had patiently picked out all the
embroidery and cut up the square of silk and stitched it into a
sash length.

"Scarlett, it's beautiful!  Did you make it yourself?  Then I'll
value it all the more.  Put it on me, my dear.  The boys will be
green with envy when they see me in the glory of my new coat and
sash."

She wrapped the bright lengths about his slender waist, above his
belt, and tied the ends in a lover's knot.  Melanie might have
given him his new coat but this sash was her gift, her own secret
guerdon for him to wear into battle, something that would make him
remember her every time he looked at it.  She stood back and viewed
him with pride, thinking that even Jeb Stuart with his flaunting
sash and plume could not look so dashing as her cavalier.

"It's beautiful," he repeated, fingering the fringe.  "But I know
you've cut up a dress or a shawl to make it.  You shouldn't have
done it, Scarlett.  Pretty things are too hard to get these days."

"Oh, Ashley, I'd--"

She had started to say:  "I'd cut up my heart for you to wear if
you wanted it," but she finished, "I'd do anything for you!"

"Would you?" he questioned and some of the somberness lifted from
his face.  "Then, there's something you can do for me, Scarlett,
something that will make my mind easier when I'm away."

"What is it?" she asked joyfully, ready to promise prodigies.

"Scarlett, will you look after Melanie for me?"

"Look after Melly?"

Her heart sank with bitter disappointment.  So this was something
beautiful, something spectacular!  And then anger flared.  This
moment was her moment with Ashley, hers alone.  And yet, though
Melanie was absent, her pale shadow lay between them.  How could he
bring up her name in their moment of farewell?  How could he ask
such a thing of her?

He did not notice the disappointment on her face.  As of old, his
eyes were looking through her and beyond her, at something else,
not seeing her at all.

"Yes, keep an eye on her, take care of her.  She's so frail and she
doesn't realize it.  She'll wear herself out nursing and sewing.
And she's so gentle and timid.  Except for Aunt Pittypat and Uncle
Henry and you, she hasn't a close relative in the world, except the
Burrs in Macon and they're third cousins.  And Aunt Pitty--
Scarlett, you know she's like a child.  And Uncle Henry is an old
man.  Melanie loves you so much, not just because you were
Charlie's wife, but because--well, because you're you and she loves
you like a sister.  Scarlett, I have nightmares when I think what
might happen to her if I were killed and she had no one to turn to.
Will you promise?"

She did not even hear his last request, so terrified was she by
those ill-omened words, "if I were killed."

Every day she had read the casualty lists, read them with her heart
in her throat, knowing that the world would end if anything should
happen to him.  But always, always, she had an inner feeling that
even if the Confederate Army were entirely wiped out, Ashley would
be spared.  And now he had spoken the frightful words!  Goose bumps
came out all over her and fear swamped her, a superstitious fear
she could not combat with reason.  She was Irish enough to believe
in second sight, especially where death premonitions were
concerned, and in his wide gray eyes she saw some deep sadness
which she could only interpret as that of a man who has felt the
cold finger on his shoulder, has heard the wail of the Banshee.

"You mustn't say it!  You mustn't even think it.  It's bad luck to
speak of death!  Oh, say a prayer, quickly!"

"You say it for me and light some candles, too," he said, smiling
at the frightened urgency in her voice.

But she could not answer, so stricken was she by the pictures her
mind was drawing, Ashley lying dead in the snows of Virginia, so
far away from her.  He went on speaking and there was a quality in
his voice, a sadness, a resignation, that increased her fear until
every vestige of anger and disappointment was blotted out.

"I'm asking you for this reason, Scarlett.  I cannot tell what will
happen to me or what will happen to any of us.  But when the end
comes, I shall be far away from here, even if I am alive, too far
away to look out for Melanie."

"The--the end?"

"The end of the war--and the end of the world."

"But Ashley, surely you can't think the Yankees will beat us?  All
this week you've talked about how strong General Lee--"

"All this week I've talked lies, like all men talk when they're on
furlough.  Why should I frighten Melanie and Aunt Pitty before
there's any need for them to be frightened?  Yes, Scarlett, I think
the Yankees have us.  Gettysburg was the beginning of the end.  The
people back home don't know it yet.  They can't realize how things
stand with us, but--Scarlett, some of my men are barefooted now and
the snow is deep in Virginia.  And when I see their poor frozen
feet, wrapped in rags and old sacks, and I see the blood prints
they leave in the snow, and know that I've got a whole pair of
boots--well, I feel like I should give mine away and be barefooted
too."

"Oh, Ashley, promise me you won't give them away!"

"When I see things like that and then look at the Yankees--then I
see the end of everything.  Why Scarlett, the Yankees are buying
soldiers from Europe by the thousands!  Most of the prisoners we've
taken recently can't even speak English.  They're Germans and Poles
and wild Irishmen who talk Gaelic.  But when we lose a man, he
can't be replaced.  When our shoes wear out, there are no more
shoes.  We're bottled up, Scarlett.  And we can't fight the whole
world."

She thought wildly:  Let the whole Confederacy crumble in the dust.
Let the world end, but you must not die!  I couldn't live if you
were dead!

"I hope you will not repeat what I have said, Scarlett.  I do not
want to alarm the others.  And, my dear, I would not have alarmed
you by saying these things, were it not that I had to explain why I
ask you to look after Melanie.  She's so frail and weak and you're
so strong, Scarlett.  It will be a comfort to me to know that you
are together if anything happens to me.  You will promise, won't
you?"

"Oh, yes!" she cried, for at that moment, seeing death at his
elbow, she would have promised anything.  "Ashley, Ashley!  I can't
let you go away!  I simply can't be brave about it!"

"You must be brave," he said, and his voice changed subtly.  It was
resonant, deeper, and his words fell swiftly as though hurried with
some inner urgency.  "You must be brave.  For how else can I stand
it?"

Her eyes sought his face quickly and with joy, wondering if he
meant that leaving her was breaking his heart, even as it was
breaking hers.  His face was as drawn as when he came down from
bidding Melanie good-by, but she could read nothing in his eyes.
He leaned down, took her face in his hands, and kissed her lightly
on the forehead.

"Scarlett!  Scarlett!  You are so fine and strong and good.  So
beautiful, not just your sweet face, my dear, but all of you, your
body and your mind and your soul."

"Oh, Ashley," she whispered happily, thrilling at his words and his
touch on her face.  "Nobody else but you ever--"

"I like to think that perhaps I know you better than most people
and that I can see beautiful things buried deep in you that others
are too careless and too hurried to notice."

He stopped speaking and his hands dropped from her face, but his
eyes still clung to her eyes.  She waited a moment, breathless for
him to continue, a-tiptoe to hear him say the magic three words.
But they did not come.  She searched his face frantically, her lips
quivering, for she saw he had finished speaking.

This second blighting of her hopes was more than heart could bear
and she cried "Oh!" in a childish whisper and sat down, tears
stinging her eyes.  Then she heard an ominous sound in the
driveway, outside the window, a sound that brought home to her even
more sharply the imminence of Ashley's departure.  A pagan hearing
the lapping of the waters around Charon's boat could not have felt
more desolate.  Uncle Peter, muffled in a quilt, was bringing out
the carriage to take Ashley to the train.

Ashley said "Good-by," very softly, caught up from the table the
wide felt hat she had inveigled from Rhett and walked into the dark
front hall.  His hand on the doorknob, he turned and looked at her,
a long, desperate look, as if he wanted to carry away with him
every detail of her face and figure.  Through a blinding mist of
tears she saw his face and with a strangling pain in her throat she
knew that he was going away, away from her care, away from the safe
haven of this house, and out of her life, perhaps forever, without
having spoken the words she so yearned to hear.  Time was going by
like a mill race, and now it was too late.  She ran stumbling
across the parlor and into the hall and clutched the ends of his
sash.

"Kiss me," she whispered.  "Kiss me good-by."

His arms went around her gently, and he bent his head to her face.
At the first touch of his lips on hers, her arms were about his
neck in a strangling grip.  For a fleeting immeasurable instant, he
pressed her body close to his.  Then she felt a sudden tensing of
all his muscles.  Swiftly, he dropped the hat to the floor and,
reaching up, detached her arms from his neck.

"No, Scarlett, no," he said in a low voice, holding her crossed
wrists in a grip that hurt.

"I love you," she said choking.  "I've always loved you.  I've
never loved anybody else.  I just married Charlie to--to try to
hurt you.  Oh, Ashley, I love you so much I'd walk every step of
the way to Virginia just to be near you!  And I'd cook for you and
polish your boots and groom your horse--Ashley, say you love me!
I'll live on it for the rest of my life!"

He bent suddenly to retrieve his hat and she had one glimpse of his
face.  It was the unhappiest face she was ever to see, a face from
which all aloofness had fled.  Written on it were his love for and
joy that she loved him, but battling them both were shame and
despair.

"Good-by," he said hoarsely.

The door clicked open and a gust of cold wind swept the house,
fluttering the curtains.  Scarlett shivered as she watched him run
down the walk to the carriage, his saber glinting in the feeble
winter sunlight, the fringe of his sash dancing jauntily.



CHAPTER XVI


January and February of 1864 passed, full of cold rains and wild
winds, clouded by pervasive gloom and depression.  In addition to
the defeats at Gettysburg and Vicksburg, the center of the Southern
line had caved.  After hard fighting, nearly all of Tennessee was
now held by the Union troops.  But even with this loss on the top
of the others, the South's spirit was not broken.  True, grim
determination had taken the place of high-hearted hopes, but people
could still find a silver lining in the cloud.  For one thing, the
Yankees had been stoutly repulsed in September when they had tried
to follow up their victories in Tennessee by an advance into
Georgia.

Here in the northwesternmost corner of the state, at Chickamauga,
serious fighting had occurred on Georgia soil for the first time
since the war began.  The Yankees had taken Chattanooga and then
had marched through the mountain passes into Georgia, but they had
been driven back with heavy losses.

Atlanta and its railroads had played a big part in making
Chickamauga a great victory for the South.  Over the railroads that
led down from Virginia to Atlanta and then northward to Tennessee,
General Longstreet's corps had been rushed to the scene of the
battle.  Along the entire route of several hundred miles, the
tracks had been cleared and all the available rolling stock in the
Southeast had been assembled for the movement.

Atlanta had watched while train after train rolled through the
town, hour after hour, passenger coaches, box cars, flat cars,
filled with shouting men.  They had come without food or sleep,
without their horses, ambulances or supply trains and, without
waiting for the rest, they had leaped from the trains and into the
battle.  And the Yankees had been driven out of Georgia, back into
Tennessee.

It was the greatest feat of the war, and Atlanta took pride and
personal satisfaction in the thought that its railroads had made
the victory possible.

But the South had needed the cheering news from Chickamauga to
strengthen its morale through the winter.  No one denied now that
the Yankees were good fighters and, at last, they had good
generals.  Grant was a butcher who did not care how many men he
slaughtered for a victory, but victory he would have.  Sheridan was
a name to bring dread to Southern hearts.  And, then, there was a
man named Sherman who was being mentioned more and more often.  He
had risen to prominence in the campaigns in Tennessee and the West,
and his reputation as a determined and ruthless fighter was
growing.

None of them, of course, compared with General Lee.  Faith in the
General and the army was still strong.  Confidence in ultimate
victory never wavered.  But the war was dragging out so long.
There were so many dead, so many wounded and maimed for life, so
many widowed, so many orphaned.  And there was still a long
struggle ahead, which meant more dead, more wounded, more widows
and orphans.

To make matters worse, a vague distrust of those in high places had
begun to creep over the civilian population.  Many newspapers were
outspoken in their denunciation of President Davis himself and the
manner in which he prosecuted the war.  There were dissensions
within the Confederate cabinet, disagreements between President
Davis and his generals.  The currency was falling rapidly.  Shoes
and clothing for the army were scarce, ordnance supplies and drugs
were scarcer.  The railroads needed new cars to take the place of
old ones and new iron rails to replace those torn up by the
Yankees.  The generals in the field were crying out for fresh
troops, and there were fewer and fewer fresh troops to be had.
Worst of all, some of the state governors, Governor Brown of
Georgia among them, were refusing to send state militia troops and
arms out of their borders.  There were thousands of able-bodied men
in the state troops for whom the army was frantic, but the
government pleaded for them in vain.

With the new fall of currency, prices soared again.  Beef, pork and
butter cost thirty-five dollars a pound, flour fourteen hundred
dollars a barrel, soda one hundred dollars a pound, tea five
hundred dollars a pound.  Warm clothing, when it was obtainable at
all, had risen to such prohibitive prices that Atlanta ladies were
lining their old dresses with rags and reinforcing them with
newspapers to keep out the wind.  Shoes cost from two hundred to
eight hundred dollars a pair, depending on whether they were made
of "cardboard" or real leather.  Ladies now wore gaiters made of
their old wool shawls and cut-up carpets.  The soles were made of
wood.

The truth was that the North was holding the South in a virtual
state of siege, though many did not realize it.  The Yankee
gunboats had tightened the mesh at the ports and very few ships
were now able to slip past the blockade.

The South had always lived by selling cotton and buying the things
it did not produce, but now it could neither sell nor buy.  Gerald
O'Hara had three years' crops of cotton stored under the shed near
the gin house at Tara, but little good it did him.  In Liverpool it
would bring one hundred and fifty thousand dollars, but there was
no hope of getting it to Liverpool.  Gerald had changed from a
wealthy man to a man who was wondering how he would feed his family
and his negroes through the winter.

Throughout the South, most of the cotton planters were in the same
fix.  With the blockade closing tighter and tighter, there was no
way to get the South's money crop to its market in England, no way
to bring in the necessaries which cotton money had brought in years
gone by.  And the agricultural South, waging war with the
industrial North, was needing so many things now, things it had
never thought of buying in times of peace.

It was a situation made to order for speculators and profiteers,
and men were not lacking to take advantage of it.  As food and
clothing grew scarcer and prices rose higher and higher, the public
outcry against the speculators grew louder and more venomous.  In
those early days of 1864, no newspaper could be opened that did not
carry scathing editorials denouncing the speculators as vultures
and bloodsucking leeches and calling upon the government to put
them down with a hard hand.  The government did its best, but the
efforts came to nothing, for the government was harried by many
things.

Against no one was feeling more bitter than against Rhett Butler.
He had sold his boats when blockading grew too hazardous, and he
was now openly engaged in food speculation.  The stories about him
that came back to Atlanta from Richmond and Wilmington made those
who had received him in other days writhe with shame.

In spite of all these trials and tribulations, Atlanta's ten
thousand population had grown to double that number during the war.
Even the blockade had added to Atlanta's prestige.  From time
immemorial, the coast cities had dominated the South, commercially
and otherwise.  But now with the ports closed and many of the port
cities captured or besieged, the South's salvation depended upon
itself.  The interior section was what counted, if the South was
going to win the war, and Atlanta was now the center of things.
The people of the town were suffering hardship, privation, sickness
and death as severely as the rest of the Confederacy; but Atlanta,
the city, had gained rather than lost as a result of the war.
Atlanta, the heart of the Confederacy, was still beating full and
strong, the railroads that were its arteries throbbing with the
never-ending flow of men, munitions and supplies.



In other days, Scarlett would have been bitter about her shabby
dresses and patched shoes but now she did not care, for the one
person who mattered was not there to see her.  She was happy those
two months, happier than she had been in years.  Had she not felt
the start of Ashley's heart when her arms went round his neck? seen
that despairing look on his face which was more open an avowal than
any words could be?  He loved her.  She was sure of that now, and
this conviction was so pleasant she could even be kinder to
Melanie.  She could be sorry for Melanie now, sorry with a faint
contempt for her blindness, her stupidity.

"When the war is over!" she thought.  "When it's over--then . . ."

Sometimes she thought with a small dart of fear:  "What then?"  But
she put the thought from her mind.  When the war was over,
everything would be settled, somehow.  If Ashley loved her, he
simply couldn't go on living with Melanie.

But then, a divorce was unthinkable; and Ellen and Gerald, staunch
Catholics that they were, would never permit her to marry a
divorced man.  It would mean leaving the Church!  Scarlett thought
it over and decided that, in a choice between the Church and
Ashley, she would choose Ashley.  But, oh, it would make such a
scandal!  Divorced people were under the ban not only of the Church
but of society.  No divorced person was received.  However, she
would dare even that for Ashley.  She would sacrifice anything for
Ashley.

Somehow it would come out all right when the war was over.  If
Ashley loved her so much, he'd find a way.  She'd make him find a
way.  And with every day that passed, she became more sure in her
own mind of his devotion, more certain he would arrange matters
satisfactorily when the Yankees were finally beaten.  Of course, he
had said the Yankees "had" them.  Scarlett thought that was just
foolishness.  He had been tired and upset when he said it.  But she
hardly cared whether the Yankees won or not.  The thing that
mattered was for the war to finish quickly and for Ashley to come
home.

Then, when the sleets of March were keeping everyone indoors, the
hideous blow fell.  Melanie, her eyes shining with joy, her head
ducked with embarrassed pride, told her she was going to have a
baby.

"Dr. Meade says it will be here in late August or September," she
said.  "I've thought--but I wasn't sure till today.  Oh, Scarlett,
isn't it wonderful?  I've so envied you Wade and so wanted a baby.
And I was so afraid that maybe I wasn't ever going to have one and,
darling, I want a dozen!"

Scarlett had been combing her hair, preparing for bed, when Melanie
spoke and she stopped, the comb in mid-air.

"Dear God!" she said and, for a moment, realization did not come.
Then there suddenly leaped to her mind the closed door of Melanie's
bedroom and a knifelike pain went through her, a pain as fierce as
though Ashley had been her own husband and had been unfaithful to
her.  A baby.  Ashley's baby.  Oh, how could he, when he loved her
and not Melanie?

"I know you're surprised," Melanie rattled on, breathlessly.  "And
isn't it too wonderful?  Oh, Scarlett, I don't know how I shall
ever write Ashley!  It wouldn't be so embarrassing if I could tell
him or--or--well, not say anything and just let him notice
gradually, you know--"

"Dear God!" said Scarlett, almost sobbing, as she dropped the comb
and caught at the marble top of the dresser for support.

"Darling, don't look like that!  You know having a baby isn't so
bad.  You said so yourself.  And you mustn't worry about me, though
you are sweet to be so upset.  Of course, Dr. Meade said I was--
was," Melanie blushed, "quite narrow but that perhaps I shouldn't
have any trouble and--Scarlett, did you write Charlie and tell him
when you found out about Wade, or did your mother do it or maybe
Mr. O'Hara?  Oh, dear, if I only had a mother to do it!  I just
don't see how--"

"Hush!" said Scarlett, violently.  "Hush!"

"Oh, Scarlett, I'm so stupid!  I'm sorry.  I guess all happy people
are selfish.  I forgot about Charlie, just for the moment--"

"Hush!" said Scarlett again, fighting to control her face and make
her emotions quiet.  Never, never must Melanie see or suspect how
she felt.

Melanie, the most tactful of women, had tears in her eyes at her
own cruelty.  How could she have brought back to Scarlett the
terrible memories of Wade being born months after poor Charlie was
dead?  How could she have been so thoughtless?

"Let me help you undress, dearest," she said humbly.  "And I'll rub
your head for you."

"You leave me alone," said Scarlett, her face like stone.  And
Melanie, bursting into tears of self-condemnation, fled the room,
leaving Scarlett to a tearless bed, with wounded pride,
disillusionment and jealousy for bedfellows.

She thought that she could not live any longer in the same house
with the woman who was carrying Ashley's child, thought that she
would go home to Tara, home, where she belonged.  She did not see
how she could ever look at Melanie again and not have her secret
read in her face.  And she arose the next morning with the fixed
intention of packing her trunk immediately after breakfast.  But,
as they sat at the table, Scarlett silent and gloomy, Pitty
bewildered and Melanie miserable, a telegram came.

It was to Melanie from Ashley's body servant, Mose.

"I have looked everywhere and I can't find him.  Must I come home?"

No one knew what it meant but the eyes of the three women went to
one another, wide with terror, and Scarlett forgot all thoughts of
going home.  Without finishing their breakfasts they drove down to
telegraph Ashley's colonel, but even as they entered the office,
there was a telegram from him.

"Regret to inform you Major Wilkes missing since scouting
expedition three days ago.  Will keep you informed."

It was a ghastly trip home, with Aunt Pitty crying into her
handkerchief, Melanie sitting erect and white and Scarlett slumped,
stunned in the corner of the carriage.  Once in the house, Scarlett
stumbled up the stairs to her bedroom and, clutching her Rosary
from the table, dropped to her knees and tried to pray.  But the
prayers would not come.  There only fell on her an abysmal fear, a
certain knowledge that God had turned His face from her for her
sin.  She had loved a married man and tried to take him from his
wife, and God had punished her by killing him.  She wanted to pray
but she could not raise her eyes to Heaven.  She wanted to cry but
the tears would not come.  They seemed to flood her chest, and they
were hot tears that burned under her bosom, but they would not
flow.

Her door opened and Melanie entered.  Her face was like a heart cut
from white paper, framed against black hair, and her eyes were
wide, like those of a frightened child lost in the dark.

"Scarlett," she said, putting out her hands.  "You must forgive me
for what I said yesterday, for you're--all I've got now.  Oh,
Scarlett, I know my darling is dead!"

Somehow, she was in Scarlett's arms, her small breasts heaving with
sobs, and somehow they were lying on the bed, holding each other
close, and Scarlett was crying too, crying with her face pressed
close against Melanie's, the tears of one wetting the cheeks of the
other.  It hurt so terribly to cry, but not so much as not being
able to cry.  Ashley is dead--dead, she thought, and I have killed
him by loving him!  Fresh sobs broke from her, and Melanie somehow
feeling comfort in her tears tightened her arms about her neck.

"At least," she whispered, "at least--I've got his baby."

"And I," thought Scarlett, too stricken now for anything so petty
as jealousy, "I've got nothing--nothing--nothing except the look on
his face when he told me good-by."



The first reports were "Missing--believed killed" and so they
appeared on the casualty list.  Melanie telegraphed Colonel Sloan a
dozen times and finally a letter arrived, full of sympathy,
explaining that Ashley and a squad had ridden out on a scouting
expedition and had not returned.  There had been reports of a
slight skirmish within the Yankee lines and Mose, frantic with
grief, had risked his own life to search for Ashley's body but had
found nothing.  Melanie, strangely calm now, telegraphed him money
and instructions to come home.

When "Missing--believed captured" appeared on the casualty lists,
joy and hope reanimated the sad household.  Melanie could hardly be
dragged away from the telegraph office and she met every train
hoping for letters.  She was sick now, her pregnancy making itself
felt in many unpleasant ways, but she refused to obey Dr. Meade's
commands and stay in bed.  A feverish energy possessed her and
would not let her be still; and at night, long after Scarlett had
gone to bed, she could hear her walking the floor in the next room.

One afternoon, she came home from town, driven by the frightened
Uncle Peter and supported by Rhett Butler.  She had fainted at the
telegraph office and Rhett, passing by and observing the
excitement, had escorted her home.  He carried her up the stairs to
her bedroom and while the alarmed household fled hither and yon for
hot bricks, blankets and whisky, he propped her on the pillows of
her bed.

"Mrs. Wilkes," he questioned abruptly, "you are going to have a
baby, are you not?"

Had Melanie not been so faint, so sick, so heartsore, she would
have collapsed at his question.  Even with women friends she was
embarrassed by any mention of her condition, while visits to Dr.
Meade were agonizing experiences.  And for a man, especially Rhett
Butler, to ask such a question was unthinkable.  But lying weak and
forlorn in the bed, she could only nod.  After she had nodded, it
did not seem so dreadful, for he looked so kind and so concerned.

"Then you must take better care of yourself.  All this running
about and worry won't help you and may harm the baby.  If you will
permit me, Mrs. Wilkes, I will use what influence I have in
Washington to learn about Mr. Wilkes' fate.  If he is a prisoner,
he will be on the Federal lists, and if he isn't--well, there's
nothing worse than uncertainty.  But I must have your promise.
Take care of yourself or, before God, I won't turn a hand."

"Oh, you are so kind," cried Melanie.  "How can people say such
dreadful things about you?"  Then overcome with the knowledge of
her tactlessness and also with horror at having discussed her
condition with a man, she began to cry weakly.  And Scarlett,
flying up the stairs with a hot brick wrapped in flannel, found
Rhett patting her hand.

He was as good as his word.  They never knew what wires he pulled.
They feared to ask, knowing it might involve an admission of his
too close affiliations with the Yankees.  It was a month before he
had news, news that raised them to the heights when they first
heard it, but later created a gnawing anxiety in their hearts.

Ashley was not dead!  He had been wounded and taken prisoner, and
the records showed that he was at Rock Island, a prison camp in
Illinois.  In their first joy, they could think of nothing except
that he was alive.  But, when calmness began to return, they looked
at one another and said "Rock Island!" in the same voice they would
have said "In Hell!"  For even as Andersonville was a name that
stank in the North, so was Rock Island one to bring terror to the
heart of any Southerner who had relatives imprisoned there.

When Lincoln refused to exchange prisoners, believing it would
hasten the end of the war to burden the Confederacy with the
feeding and guarding of Union prisoners, there were thousands of
bluecoats at Andersonville, Georgia.  The Confederates were on
scant rations and practically without drugs or bandages for their
own sick and wounded.  They had little to share with the prisoners.
They fed their prisoners on what the soldiers in the field were
eating, fat pork and dried peas, and on this diet the Yankees died
like flies, sometimes a hundred a day.  Inflamed by the reports,
the North resorted to harsher treatment of Confederate prisoners
and at no place were conditions worse than at Rock Island.  Food
was scanty, one blanket for three men, and the ravages of smallpox,
pneumonia and typhoid gave the place the name of a pest-house.
Three-fourths of all the men sent there never came out alive.

And Ashley was in that horrible place!  Ashley was alive but he was
wounded and at Rock Island, and the snow must have been deep in
Illinois when he was taken there.  Had he died of his wound, since
Rhett had learned his news?  Had he fallen victim to smallpox?  Was
he delirious with pneumonia and no blanket to cover him?

"Oh, Captain Butler, isn't there some way--  Can't you use your
influence and have him exchanged?" cried Melanie.

"Mr. Lincoln, the merciful and just, who cries large tears over
Mrs. Bixby's five boys, hasn't any tears to shed about the
thousands of Yankees dying at Andersonville," said Rhett, his mouth
twisting.  "He doesn't care if they all die.  The order is out.  No
exchanges.  I--I hadn't told you before, Mrs. Wilkes, but your
husband had a chance to get out and refused it."

"Oh, no!" cried Melanie in disbelief.

"Yes, indeed.  The Yankees are recruiting men for frontier service
to fight the Indians, recruiting them from among Confederate
prisoners.  Any prisoner who will take the oath of allegiance and
enlist for Indian service for two years will be released and sent
West.  Mr. Wilkes refused."

"Oh, how could he?" cried Scarlett.  "Why didn't he take the oath
and then desert and come home as soon as he got out of jail?"

Melanie turned on her like a small fury.

"How can you even suggest that he would do such a thing?  Betray
his own Confederacy by taking that vile oath and then betray his
word to the Yankees!  I would rather know he was dead at Rock
Island than hear he had taken that oath.  I'd be proud of him if he
died in prison.  But if he did THAT, I would never look on his face
again.  Never!  Of course, he refused."

When Scarlett was seeing Rhett to the door, she asked indignantly:
"If it were you, wouldn't you enlist with the Yankees to keep from
dying in that place and then desert?"

"Of course," said Rhett, his teeth showing beneath his mustache.

"Then why didn't Ashley do it?"

"He's a gentleman," said Rhett, and Scarlett wondered how it was
possible to convey such cynicism and contempt in that one honorable
word.